Materials and methods Patient’s samples and cell lines Peripheral blood samples were obtained from patients with diagnosed AML as well as from young (below 30) and aged-matched healthy donors. Sample collection was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and with the approval of the Research Ethical Committee of the University of Navarra. All subjects provided written informed consent. Jurkat-TPR cells (kindly provided by Dr. P. Steinberg; Medical University of Vienna) were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Lonza) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco). MOLM-13 was cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 20% FBS. HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. All media were supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco) and 1% L-Glutamine (Gibco). All cell lines were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2. Lentiviral vector construction and virus preparation A third-generation self-inactivating lentiviral vector (pCCL) was used to express under the EF1a promoter second-generation CAR constructs targeting CD33, derived from M195 or my96 antibodies. CAR structure comprised the single-chain variable fragment (scFv), a panel of different hinge regions derived from CD8a or IgG4, a CD8 transmembrane domain, 4-1BB or CD28 co-stimulatory domain, and CD3ζ endodomain ( Figure S1A ). All constructs included an huEGFRt transduction marker separated from the CAR gene by a viral 2A sequence. Lentiviral vectors were produced in HEK293T cells following standard procedures. Briefly, 6×106 cells were co-transfected with LV vector along with pMDLg/pRRE (Gag/Pol), pRSVRev, and pMD2.G (VSVG envelope) packaging plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Supernatants were collected 40h after transfection, filtered, concentrated using Lenti-X Concentrator (Takara) following manufacturer specifications, and stored at -80°C until use. Analysis of CAR signaling in Jurkat-TPR Jurkat-TPR cells, transduced at MOI of 1 with CAR constructs targeting CD33 were co-cultured in triplicate with MOLM-13 cells, at a 1:1 effector to tumor cell ratio. Non-transduced Jurkat-TPR cells or transduced with a previously described CAR construct targeting CD19 were used as control. Activation of the NFAT, NF-κB, and AP-1 pathways was quantified before and 24h after co-culture with tumor cells measuring eGFP, eCFP, and mCherry emissions respectively, using a CytoFLEX LX Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter) ( Figure S1B ). CAR-T cell generation Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were isolated with Ficoll-Paque and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were selected using CD4 and CD8 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) in the AutoMACS Pro Separator (Miltenyi Biotec). Isolated T cells were activated with 10 µl/ml T cell TransAct (Miltenyi Biotec) for 48h and infected with the CAR lentiviral vector at MOI 2 with 10 µl/ml of LentiBoost (Sirion Biotech). CAR-T cells were expanded during 10-12 days in RPMI 1640 culture medium supplemented with 3% human serum (Sigma), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 625 IU/ml of human IL-7 and 85 IU/ml of human IL-15 (Miltenyi Biotec). CAR-T cells were counted, and the concentration was adjusted to 1×106 cells/ml every two days. Flow cytometry Phenotypic characterization of T cells and CAR-T cells was performed at day 0 and 14 of the production, respectively. All antibodies were purchased from Biolegend unless otherwise stated ( Table S1 ). Data was acquired on a BD FACSCanto II (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using the FlowJo Software version 10 (Tree Star). Cytotoxicity assay and cytokine production Cytotoxicity was determined using MOLM-13-GFPLuc as target tumor cells. Briefly, MOLM-13-GFPLuc cells were cultured with CAR-T cells at different ratios in RPMI 1640 culture medium, supplemented with 3% human serum (Sigma) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin in Nunc™ 96-Well Round Bottom plates (ThermoFisher Scientific). After 24h, luminescence was measured using the Bright-Glo™ Luciferase Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. IFN-γ cytokine production was quantified using BD™ Immunoassay ELISA reagents (BD Biosciences) following manufacturer protocol. Continuous repeated stimulation CAR-T cells were co-cultured with irradiated MOLM-13-GFPLuc tumor cells for 21 days. Briefly, 1×106 cells MOLM-13-GFPLuc were irradiated at 54 Gy to prevent tumor growth, and co-cultured with CAR-T cells, at a 1:1 effector: target ratio of cells, in RPMI culture medium. Every three days, CAR T cells were counted and irradiated tumoral cells were added at a 1:1 ratio. On day 21, the phenotype of CAR-T cells was studied.  In vivo experiments All experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Navarra and the Institute of Public Health of Navarra according to European Council Guidelines. NOD-SCID-Il2rg−/− (NSG) mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (JAX) and bred and maintained in-house in a pathogen-free facility. Eight-to-twelve-week-old male or female mice were irradiated at 1.5 Gy at day -1 and 5×104 MOLM-13-GFPLuc cells were intravenously injected the following day. Mice were randomized to ensure equal pre-treatment tumor burden before CAR-T cell treatment. At day 4 mice received i.v. injection of 3×106 CAR-T cells. Mice were humanely euthanized when mice demonstrated signs of morbidity and/or hindlimb paralysis. RNA-sequencing and bioinformatics analysis RNA-seq was performed following the MARS-seq protocol adapted for bulk RNA-seq with minor modifications. RNA-seq libraries quantification was done with Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies) and size profiles were examined using Agilent’s 4200 TapeStation System. Libraries were sequenced in an Illumina NextSeq500 at a sequence depth of 10 million reads per sample. Samples were aligned to the Human genome (GRCh38) with STAR (v2.6.1). Gene expression was quantified with quant3p (). Downstream analyses were performed in R (v3.6.2). Data transformation, normalization, and differential gene expression analysis were performed with DESeq2. Genes were considered adjusted p value (p-adj)<0.05 and absolute log transformed fold-change (|log2FC|)>1, unless otherwise indicated. vst expression values were used for data visualization and unsupervised analysis. Stem cell memory, T cell activation, and exhaustion gene signatures used in this work were obtained from previous publications ( Table S2 ). The normalized gene expression matrix was used to discover the disrupted genes after stimulation of AML CAR-T cells in comparison to adult and senior CAR-T cells. These genes were found using the maSigPro package (version 1.72.0) which applies a negative binomial model to the expression distribution and adjusts the false discovery rate using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure. The degree of polynomial regression in this study was set to 2, and the two ways forward elimination algorithm was used to perform stepwise regression to select genes with alpha equal to 0.05. To extract the significant genes upon stimulation the following settings were used: min.obs=2, and rsq=0.7. sgRNA design and in vitro evaluation sgRNAs targeting exon 1 of the beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) gene and exon 1 of T-cell receptor α constant (TRAC) locus were designed and selected as described previously using Benchling software (www.benchling.com). Sequences for B2M and TRAC sgRNAs can be found in  Table S3 . In vitro cleavage efficiency was evaluated by TIDE after transfection of Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9) and sgRNA ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNP) in the Jurkat cell line. SpCas9 protein and sgRNAs were purchased from IDT. 2x106 Jurkat cells were electroporated with 61 pmol of RNP (ratio 1:1 Cas9:sgRNA) using the SE Cell Line 4D-Nucleofector Kit and the CL120 program on a 4D-Nucleofector System (Lonza) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Genomic DNA was isolated with NucleoSpin Tissue for DNA extraction kit (Macherey-Nagel) 72h after electroporation and subjected to targeted PCR amplification using primer described in  Table S4 . Indel percentage was calculated using the TIDE webtool (https://tide.nki.nl). Preparation of MC DNA and SB100X mRNA Minicircle (MC) encoding CD33 targeting CAR was generated from parental pT2 plasmids by PlasmidFactory, using site-specific recombination and purified by affinity chromatography. Poly(A)-tailed ARCA-capped SB100X mRNA was produced by in vitro transcription from the T7-SB100X plasmid (Addgene #34879) using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE kit and column purified using the MEGAclear kit (Ambion). CAR-TKO cell production combining CRISPR and Sleeping Beauty transposon systems CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs and activated as described above. 2x106 T cells were electroporated 48h after activation with 1µg of MC, 1 µg of SB100X mRNA, 3µM of each sgRNA (targeting TRAC and B2M), and 1,5µM Cas9 previously mixed as an RNP, using the ExPERT GTx™ electroporation device from MaxCyte, according to manufacturer’s instructions. CAR-T cells were expanded in TexMACS™ culture medium (Miltenyi Biotec) supplemented with 3% human serum (Sigma), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 625 IU/ml of human IL-7 and 85 IU/ml of human IL-15 (Miltenyi Biotec). HLA-IKO/TCRKO CAR-T cells were negatively selected using the AutoMACS Pro Separator after incubation with anti-human HLA-I and TCRα/β antibodies and Anti-Biotin MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For large-scale productions conditions were scaled proportionally to the number of cells.  Sleeping Beauty copy number analysis SB copy number (CN) per cell was determined by qPCR. Genomic DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen). CN/cell was quantified by duplex detection of the WPRE sequence, normalized to ALBUMIN, using specific primers, and detected with the TaqMan probes ( Table S4 ). qPCR was performed using the Absolute qPCR Mix Low ROX Mix (Thermo Scientific) in a QuantStudio™ 3 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Results were analyzed in QuantStudio 3 Design and Analysis Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Integration site analysis Integration site analysis was performed in genomic DNA isolated with NucleoSpin Tissue for DNA extraction kit (Macherey-Nagel) from CAR-T and CAR-TKO cells (3 independent productions) using INSPIIRED pipeline with minor modifications as described. Sequencing was carried out in an Illumina MiSeq at a depth of 3-10x105 reads per sample using MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 300-cycles (Illumina) (Rd1: 179c; Index1: 12c; Rd2: 143c). Raw sequencing data was demultiplexed and trimmed of ITR-specific sequences. Then, sequences were filtered against the vector sequence. The remaining unique sequences were aligned to the Human genome (GRCh38) reference using BLAT. Alignment for R1 and R2 sequences were then joined together and filtered for quality alignments, yielding unique sites of integration or multihit locations. Data were stored within an R object. Unique sites were annotated using the clusterProfiler library. The virtual machine, software, and instructions are available at https://github.com/BushmanLab/INSPIIRED. iGUIDE Libraries were prepared following the protocol described in iGUIDE. Genomic DNA from samples was purified with NucleoSpin Tissue for DNA extraction kit (Macherey-Nagel) and randomly fragmented by ultrasonication. Adapters were ligated to end-repaired DNA, and targeted DNA was amplified through a nested-PCR from the incorporated dsODN to the ligated adapter sequence. Amplicons were purified and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq with 300 cycle v2 reagent kits. Output sequence data was analyzed using the iGUIDE pipeline. The software and instructions are available at https://github.com/cnobles/iGUIDE. Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism for Mac version 10.0.0. The different tests used in this work are indicated in the figure legend.