Introduction Huntington disease (HD) is a devastating, inherited neurodegenerative disease with progressive cognitive, psychological and physical symptoms. HD is caused by expansion of the CAG repeat tract in exon 1 of the huntingtin (HTT) gene above a critical threshold of ~35 repeats, resulting in expression of a polyglutamine (polyQ) expanded form of the HTT protein, referred to as mutant HTT (mHTT). HTT plays important roles in proteostasis, axonal transport, transcription regulation, cellular stress responses, and mitochondrial function and the expression of mHTT is considered responsible for the molecular pathogenesis cascade, including both loss of function and gain of toxic function, resulting in HD phenotypes in HD animal models and patients. However, despite being a monogenic disorder, the mechanisms of HD pathophysiology are complex, and remain the subject of intense study. The majority of candidate therapies currently being tested in clinical trials for HD aim to lower levels of the mHTT protein. To infer target-engagement of these drugs, mHTT levels, usually from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), are monitored using ultrasensitive detection assays. Decreased mHTT levels in HD model mouse brain following intracerebroventricular administration of HTT-targeting antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) were shown to induce correlative mHTT lowering in CSF, validating CSF mHTT quantitation as a pharmacodynamic biomarker for HTT lowering clinical trials. mHTT is also a monitoring biomarker for HD, and its levels track with proximity to disease onset as well as cognitive and motor deficits. Numerous different mHTT detection assays have been developed to date, all of which employ capture-probe antibody pairs, one which is used to immunoprecipitate and the other is used for detection of mHTT for biofluid samples. Moreover, a single full-length mHTT protein standard is often used to determine a molar concentration of mHTT from assay signal. mHTT exists in many different proteoforms including alternatively spliced fragments, proteolytically cleaved fragments, in complexes with a myriad of binding partners and with different polyQ tract lengths generated via somatic expansion mechanisms. However, our current understanding of the relative distribution of these proteoforms in biofluids and other samples from people with HD or HD animal models, or how they track with disease, remains limited. One limitation of mHTT detection immunoassays is the inherent bias in which specific proteoforms are detected, which is defined by the epitopes of the antibody pair that are used. Different antibody pairs will preferentially detect different proteoforms of mHTT and no one pair of antibodies can detect all or “total” HTT in the complex milieu of species that exists in biological samples given the fragmentation and variety of conformations of this protein. Additionally, the commonly used MW1 antibody, which was raised against the DRPLA-19Q/GST fusion protein, binds polyQ expanded proteins, and can form stoichiometrically heterogenous interactions with mHTT species. This suggests that polyQ length functions as an additional variable for detection assay signal, in addition to mHTT concentration. Indeed, the variable stoichiometry of MW1-mHTT polyQ interactions compared to other anti-HTT antibodies likely accounts for the so-called detection paradox where mHTT concentration exceeds total HTT concentration. This paradox suggests that absolute quantitation of mHTT may not be possible with immunoassays with a single protein standard across an array of patient samples where CAG number, and hence polyQ length, is variable, and that defining molar concentrations of mHTT by such a methodology may be misleading. In this study, we set out to explore different factors which can influence mHTT detection assay signal using a suite of HTT proteins, including a comprehensive allelic series of full-length HTT samples, spanning wildtype to juvenile HD polyQ tract lengths. Employing an IP-FCM assay, as well as other immunoassay approaches, we show that a variety of mHTT properties and assay condition considerations influence assay signal and show that using a single protein standard across an array of biological samples is not sufficient to allow accurate calculation of mHTT concentration. We also explore the binding specificity of the MW1 antibody and demonstrate that detection of polyQ expanded mHTT is preferential but not specific. Together these data support a new paradigm for mHTT detection, where results are reported as relative quantitation in reference to a given standard protein rather than reporting absolute concentrations. Moreover, that MW1-depletion should not be used to quantify wildtype HTT protein.