Introduction Adoptive immunotherapy using T cells engineered with Chimeric Antigen Receptors (CAR-T cells) has emerged as a promising therapeutic option for several B cell malignancies. The impressive results with CAR-T cells targeting CD19 and BCMA have led to the approval by the FDA and the EMA of several CAR-T cell products for refractory cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia and large B cell lymphoma. Nevertheless, the use of CAR-T cell therapy for other hematological malignancies, and in particular for acute myeloid leukemia (AML), still presents specific challenges that hamper their efficacy and limit their implementation. One of the main biological barriers for CAR-T therapies in AML is the absence of AML-specific antigens. Most of the cell surface antigens present in AML blasts (CD33, CD123, or CLL1) are also present in normal hematopoietic, representing a safety concern, since a prolonged myeloablation would be ultimately fatal. Thus, several strategies to prevent the risk of bone marrow failure after CAR-T therapy have been proposed, including the limitation of CAR-T cell persistence, by the inclusion of safety switches, or the identification of neoantigens specific for AML blasts. Another interesting approach, currently under clinical evaluation, is the generation of leukemia-specific antigen by deleting CD33 from normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, thereby enabling specific targeting of AML with CD33-CAR-T cells, since hematopoietic system would be resistant to CD33-targeted therapy. Nevertheless, most of the current CAR-T therapies under clinical evaluation are directed against CD33 or CD123, reporting antitumoral responses in some cases, although more complete clinical results have yet to be published. In addition, the dependency on patient-specific T cells for autologous approaches, particularly from heavily treated patients, may lead to inadequate T cell numbers, suboptimal CAR-T cell functions, and unsuccessful CAR-T cell production. However, there is a lack of studies performing a detailed and deep characterization of AML patient-derived CAR-T cells with a direct comparison to CAR-T cells from healthy donors. The use of allogeneic CAR-T cells could overcome some of the limitations of autologous patient-specific CAR-T cells. However, allogeneic cells may trigger graft-versus- host disease (GvHD) that would compromise therapeutic safety. Since TCR ablation prevents GvHD, several strategies for endogenous TCR inactivation in CAR-T cells have been reported. One of the most promising approaches relies on the use of TALEN and/or CRISPR technologies for TCR disruption, which can be combined with different viral and non-viral vectors for the generation of allogeneic CAR-T cells. Despite allogeneic CAR-T cells can be successfully manufactured for therapeutic applications, there is an unmet need to overcome several limitations related to complex manufacturing procedures or the use of viral vectors, that would allow a cost-effective and safer generation of allogeneic CAR-T cell products. In this sense, the use of non-viral vectors based on Sleeping Beauty transposon systems for CAR delivery has emerged as a promising option that offers a number of advantages, including larger cargo capacity, reduced manufacturing complexity and costs, and safer integration profiles compared with integrating viral vectors. Nevertheless, the combination of Sleeping Beauty transposon systems with CRISPR technologies for the manufacturing of allogeneic CAR-T cells has not been extensively explored. In this work, we have performed a deep phenotypic, transcriptomic, and functional characterization of T and CAR-T cells from AML patients that resulted in the identification of specific features that could compromise their antitumoral efficacy, compared to CAR-T cells from healthy donors. To overcome some of these limitations we have combined CRISPR-based genome editing technologies with virus-free gene-transfer strategies using Sleeping Beauty transposons, to generate allogeneic CAR-T cells targeting CD33. Our optimized protocol allows the generation of fully functional HLA-IKO/TCRKO CD33-CAR-T cells in conditions compatible with clinical applications. These allogeneic CD33-CAR-T cells would represent a promising option for AML treatment, especially for therapeutic approaches in R/R AML patients where CAR-T cells are used to reduce tumor burden as bridging therapy prior to allogeneic stem cell transplantation.