Introduction The trypanosomatid Leishmania is a protozoan parasite that is transmitted to various mammalian hosts through the bloodmeal of the female phlebotomine sandfly. Leishmania infection can lead to various diseases collectively called leishmaniases, for which clinical presentation varies immensely depending on the causative species and host factors. While Cutaneous leishmaniasis usually presents as self-healing cutaneous lesions, parasitic metastasis to the nasopharyngeal mucosal regions causes severe and disfiguring mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. The most severe form, visceral leishmaniasis, is characterized by systemic infection and is lethal in nearly all untreated cases. Despite over half the world’s population being at risk of contracting the infection, primarily in low-income countries, leishmaniasis has been classified as a neglected tropical disease (NTD) by the World Health Organization due to a significant lack of investment in the research and development of therapeutics. The term extracellular vesicles (EVs) encompasses exosomes, ectosomes, and apoptotic bodies – each of which has a distinct cellular origin, diameter, function, and physical properties. Exosomes – the smallest EVs (30-150 nm) – are of endosomal origin and are ubiquitously produced by eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. They have been shown to play a role in many physiological and pathological functions, including cell-cell communication, immunological responses, renal pathologies, cancer, and infectious diseases, among others. The latter is particularly of interest in the context of leishmaniasis, for which exosomes produced by parasites themselves are involved in immunopathogenesis and are a major determinant of disease outcome. Exosomes are produced by Leishmania spp. in the midgut of the phlebotomine sandfly vector, while parasites are concentrated and packaged into the insect’s infectious inoculum. During the female sandfly’s bloodmeal, leishmanial exosomes are co-egested alongside the parasite into the mammalian host’s skin, immediately exerting effects on surrounding tissues by inhibiting innate immune processes and ultimately exacerbating cutaneous pathology. This process is partially driven by the surface metalloprotease GP63 – a key leishmanial virulence factor which permits motility through the extracellular matrix and abrogates leishmanicidal macrophage function by way of inhibiting oxidative burst, among other roles. Thus, the study of leishmanial exosomes and their role in parasitic survival and virulence is a growing field of study and is essential to understanding the progression of disease. However, the isolation and identification of leishmanial exosomes continue to pose a challenge in the field, as is the case with most EVs of non-mammalian origin. Although markers for mammalian exosomes, such as CD63, CD9, and CD81, have been identified in recent studies, the lack of homologous proteins in Leishmania spp. presents a significant challenge for the precise identification of leishmanial exosomes. Further, while Heat Shock Proteins, particularly HSP83 and HSP70, are used as predictive markers of Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes, they display a lack of specificity to this vesicle class and have been identified across all EV populations, introducing potential error due to misclassification and improper utilization of extracellular vesicles of non-exosomal origin. Herein, we aimed to address this knowledge gap by identifying potential novel biomarkers of leishmanial exosomes through proteomic and bioinformatic studies of all subclasses of EVs, obtaining subpopulations by adapting Kowal et al.’s methodology for serial differential ultracentrifugation of mammalian EVs to protozoa.