Introduction Glucocorticoids, such as cortisol in humans and corticosterone in rats and mice, are produced by the zona fasciculata cells of the adrenal cortex in a diurnal pattern under the control of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Glucocorticoids play a crucial role in regulating metabolism, immune function, and the response to stress. They have been widely acknowledged as stress hormones, and their production markedly increases following exposure to stress. In the mammalian brain, stress-induced elevations in glucocorticoids induce variable neuronal effects via both genomic and non-genomic signaling pathways. The genomic pathway, which has been well studied, is mainly mediated by the cytosolic glucocorticoid receptor. Activated by glucocorticoid binding, the glucocorticoid receptors undergo conformational changes and translocate to the nucleus to regulate cellular gene expression. For example, stress-induced increases in the glucocorticoid level induce neuronal structure changes in the hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex. However, the non-genomic effects of glucocorticoids, which usually occur within a few minutes and depend on the membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptor, are still not fully understood. Increasing evidence indicates that the rapid non-genomic effects of glucocorticoids may be related to the ion channels on the cell membrane. A previous study showed that cortisol, the endogenous glucocorticoids, can rapidly increase the large conductance calcium and the voltage-dependent potassium currents (IK) in rat chromaffin cells. Cortisol can also rapidly inhibit Kv1.3 channels in the rat paraventricular nucleus and L-type calcium channels in the tilapia prolactin cells. Interestingly, the level of glucocorticoids in the brain oscillates constantly. Recent studies show that the ultradian rhythmicity of glucocorticoids is critical in regulating normal emotional and cognitive responses in humans. Glucocorticoids may regulate neural activity through rapid non-genomic effects during these fluctuations. The Kv2 channel family, which consists of Kv2.1 and Kv2.2, plays a vital role in modulating neural excitability. Kv2.1 is expressed throughout the mammalian brain, whereas Kv2.2 is preferentially expressed in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) in the brain stem, basal forebrain, and layers 2 and 5a of the neocortex. The Kv2 channels are critical for maintaining high-frequency action potential (AP) firing upon intense stimulation. The calyx of Held synapse, a giant glutamatergic synapse located in the MNTB of the brainstem, provides great convenience for investigating both pre-and postsynaptic mechanisms of synaptic transmission. Previous studies have demonstrated that Kv2.2 is highly expressed in the MNTB and involved in maintaining high-frequency AP firing by facilitating the recovery of voltage-gated sodium channels from inactivation. In the present study, we investigated the rapid non-genomic effect of cortisol, the endogenous glucocorticoids, on Kv2.2 channels that were overexpressed in HEK293 cells and brain slices, including cortical layer 2 pyramidal neurons and the calyx-type synapses. We found that glucocorticoids rapidly increase the Kv2.2 channel currents via the glucocorticoid receptors on the cell membrane and phosphorylation of the ERK pathway. Cortisol significantly reduces the AP firing rate in cortical pyramidal neurons and the presynaptic nerve terminals of the calyx-type synapses through Kv2.2 channels. The similar effects in the prefrontal cortex and brainstem in our results may suggest a possible universal mechanism for the rapid non-genomic glucocorticoid-induced effect in the brain.