Discussion CAR-T therapies targeting CD19 and BCMA have demonstrated impressive results in B-cell malignancies, achieving long-term responses. However, similar results have not been obtained in other hematological diseases such as acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Despite one of the main barriers hampering CAR-T cell efficacy in AML is the absence of AML-specific antigens, since most of the cell surface antigens present in AML blasts are also present in normal hematopoietic cells, for this work we selected CD33 as a model antigen for several reasons. CD33-CAR-T cells have shown some clinical efficacy, although mature clinical results have yet to be published, and Gemtuzumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against CD33, is already approved for the treatment of AML patients, supporting their role as an AML target. Moreover, allogeneic CD33-CAR-T cells have a promising therapeutic potential as a bridging therapy, prior to allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, for some R/R AML patients. In this study, we addressed several strategies that may contribute to increasing the efficacy of CAR-T cells in AML. First have demonstrated that modifications of different CAR moieties impact the CAR-T cell response. As described for other CAR constructs hinge length and scFv sequence affected CAR activation and tonic signaling, pointing out that optimal configurations are required for efficient recognition. Although this optimization cannot be generalized and should be evaluated for each antigen, we observed that CAR constructs derived from the my96 clone had better antigen-dependent responses probably due to the increased affinity for CD33. The hinge length had a less critical role, but results suggested that shorter versions presented better outcomes, although more experiments should be performed to clarify this point. Other modifications such as changes in the costimulatory domain barely affected CAR-T functionality, especially in vivo, where similar antitumoral efficacy was observed between 4-1BB and CD28 CD33-CAR-T cells using NSG xenograft models. Differences in efficacy associated with co-stimulatory molecules have been described, in part related to activation of different signaling transduction pathways. The reasons for the absence of differences in our case might be explained in part by the aggressivity of the AML model, since a few thousand MOLM-13 cells are able to induce animal death in 2 weeks. Although several studies have consistently indicated that the fitness of T cells is compromised in patients with AML, our study contributes to understanding some of the regulatory mechanisms underlying these abnormalities. Furthermore, it provides additional evidence that the fitness of the T cells has an impact on the phenotype and functional capacity of the CAR-T cells generated from those T cells. Beyond the impact that CAR-T cell manufacturing has on CAR-T cell phenotype, being more evident in senior samples, differences observed in T cells from AML patients were also translated into the CAR-T cells, presenting an even more differentiated, activated, and exhausted phenotypes, that resulted in a reduced antitumoral efficacy both in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, we identified changes that were age-related, since they were also observed in CAR-T cells from aged-matched healthy donors, which were more exacerbated after tumor recognition in AML CAR-T cells. Other differences, however, were intrinsic to AML, in particular the higher proportion of terminally differentiated effector CD8+ CAR-T cells with increased levels of exhaustion markers. These results are in accordance with studies performed in CAR-T cells from MM patients, another hematological disease mostly developed in elderly people. These features would explain the differences observed in the functionality of those AML CAR-T cells and would suggest that autologous CAR-T cell approaches could not be the best option for AML treatment. Recent studies have proposed the use of matched donor-derived allogeneic cells, that could partially overcome some of the limitations of autologous CAR-T cells. The use of allogeneic cells for the generation of CAR-T cells has been proposed as a means to generate an off-the-shelf product which has a number of advantages over autologous products. The use of fitter T-cells, the potential to generate many different dosages from a single donor and with significant reduction in costs need to be balanced with the limitations associated with allogeneic cells such as the development of GVHD and the need for additional immunosuppression to facilitate engraftment. Recent clinical studies have demonstrated the possibility of manufacturing gene-edited CAR-T cells for the treatment of patients with MM or ALL. Different technologies, including TALEN nucleases or CRISPR systems, have been explored to prevent immune rejection and GvHD, generally by eliminating the expression of endogenous TCR and HLA-I complexes. Editing of additional genes (i.e. PD1, CD52, HLA-II, etc…) would represent a promising option to improve allogeneic CAR-T therapies, by increasing antitumoral efficacy (PD1 disruption) and/or increasing CAR-T cell persistence (CD52 knock-out). Moreover, the use of novel gene editing technologies, such as base-editing tools, would represent a promising and safer option under evaluation for the generation of allogeneic CAR-T cells. However, the large-scale production compatible with clinical applications, as well as the clinical efficacy and safety of these multiple-gene edited CAR-T cells still needs to be demonstrated. Our results have combined two state-of-the-art technologies to generate a ready-to-use allogeneic CD33-CAR-T product, the CRISPR systems and non-viral Sleeping Beauty (SB) based transposon systems. We have optimized the manufacturing protocol reducing the critical steps that compromise cell viability and simplifying the overall procedure. In contrast to recently published protocols, where the CAR transduction and editing steps are performed sequentially, our protocol uses a single electroporation step for the efficient delivery of the CAR and the efficient depletion of both HLA-I and TCR complexes. Although the transduction efficiency is slightly reduced in the edited cell, with a lower number of CAR+ cells our protocol is able to generate enough cells compatible with clinical applications. In accordance with previous studies, we have also demonstrated that double HLA-I and TCR-depleted CAR-T cells (CAR-TKO cells) have similar features to non-edited CAR-T cells. Moreover, although some variabilities were observed in the in vivo antitumoral efficacy, probably due to the aggressivity of the tumor model and the donor’s variability, CAR-TKO cells are fully functional. In summary, although additional studies related to CAR-TKO cell persistence could be performed to better characterize this aspect in long-term applications, our results would support the use of these CAR-TKO cells for therapeutic approaches in R/R AML patients where CAR-T cells are used to reduce tumor burden as bridging therapy prior to allogeneic stem cell transplantation. We have additionally performed a set of analyses to confirm the safety of CAR-TKO cells. The combination of the SB transposon system with CRISPR ribonucleoprotein (RNP) does not alter either the vector copy number or the insertion site, indicating that CAR-TKO cells maintain the safe integration profile described for SB transposon system. Moreover, off-target analysis using improved technologies for unbiased genome-wide analysis, corroborated that CRISPR-mediated modifications were specific without significant off-targets. Although the absence of off-targets was expected for the sgRNA targeting the TRAC locus, since it was already described and validated in the literature, the b2M sgRNA was specifically designed for this study, and safety assessment was a requirement for potential clinical translation. Our results clearly indicate that the combination of these two sgRNAs are very efficient and specific. Moreover, based on previous results using the same or similar sgRNAs, we could anticipate that safety issues related to chromosomal rearrangements would be unlikely. In the future, and in order to move to clinical application additional analysis, like CAST-seq, should be performed to corroborate genomic safety. Finally, we have demonstrated that our protocol is scalable, being able to produce sufficient CAR-TKO cells compatible with clinical applications without compromising CAR-T functionality and purity. Moreover, our protocol for the generation of CAR-TKO cells is not restricted to CD33-targeting CAR-T cells, since delivery of the CAR construct and the HLA-I and TCR knock-out processes, although performed together, are independent processes. Thus, HLA-I and TCR disruption (or even other genes of interest) could be combined with any other CAR construct targeting a different antigen, either for AML treatment (i.e. CLL1 or CD44v6) or another relevant disease (i.e. solid tumors). Although currently CAR-T cell manufacturing has a tendency toward the automatization of procedures, as described recently, our approach reduces the number of steps required for production. Moreover, the expansion of the cells in G-Rex devices is compatible with further automatizations in the fill and finish steps, which should be optimized using GMP procedures. In summary, our work demonstrates that CAR-T cells from AML patients, although functional, present phenotypic and functional features that could compromise their antitumoral efficacy, compared to CAR-T cells from healthy donors. The combination of CRISPR technologies with transposon-based delivery strategies allows the generation of HLA-IKO/TCRKO CAR-T cells, compatible with allogeneic approaches, that would represent a promising option for AML treatment.