Background Breast cancer (BC) is cancer that forms in normal breast tissues and can occur in men and women; however, it mainly occurs in women and threatens women’s health. BC involves lobules, ducts, and connective tissue of the breast and has different physiological properties and clinical outcomes. Breast cancer can be divided into luminal A, luminal B, HER2 overexpressing, and TNBC. TNBC accounts for 15–20% of BCs. Patients with TNBC showed a poorer prognosis than patients with other BCs. Despite advanced interventions, relapse and metastasis of BC reduced survival rates. These interventions are not the best option for the treatment of BC metastasis. Understanding BC tumorigenesis-related signaling pathways might help in the development of a therapeutic approach for cancer treatment. BC stem cells (BCSCs) are BC subpopulations and play an important role in the metastasis of BC and resistance to chemotherapy. BCSCs are capable of self-renewal and differentiate into cancer cells. Much data show that BCSCs cause tumor progression and drug resistance to conventional therapy. Targeting breast CSCs may be a good tool for BC treatment. BRD4 is a transcriptional and epigenetic factor that plays a vital role in embryogenesis and cancer development and is a member of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) family (BRD2, BRD3, and BRDT). Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (Brd4) supports tumor-driving oncogene expression. Since the BET family is a potential cancer therapeutic target, BET inhibitors are currently in preclinical and clinical trials for the treatment of multiple tumors. BRD4 regulates the self-renewal ability of glioma-initiating cells by interaction in the Notch1 promoter region and involvement of tumor metabolism. JQ1, BET (BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4) inhibitor, represents the anti-BCSC activity. BRD4 regulates the transcription factor △Np63α to induce the CSC phenotype in squamous cell carcinoma. However, whether the BRD4 signal is related to the formation of breast CSCs is unknown. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a cluster of differentiation 274 (CD274) or B7 homolog 1 (B7-H1) protein that is encoded by the CD274 gene in humans. The PD- programmed cell death protein 11/PD-L1 axis inhibits T-cell activation and cytotoxic secretion in tumors, is responsible for the cancer immune escape, and makes a huge effect on cancer therapy. PD-L1 plays an important role in inhibiting immune response by modulating T-cell activation and inducing apoptosis of antigen-specific T-cells. PD-L1 attenuates the host immune response to tumor cells. Therefore, the PD-1/PD-L1 axis is responsible for cancer immune escape and gives bad effects on cancer therapy. PD-L1 is overexpressed on breast CSCs through the notch3/mTOR axis and enhanced colorectal cancer stem cell (CSC) formation by activating the HMGA1-dependent pathway. Immune checkpoint Inhibitor therapy is one of the most promising anticancer therapies. Antibodies against the PD-1/PD-L1 axis have been applied to several cancers and have demonstrated good efficacy. Nevertheless, monotherapy with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 of metastatic BC showed a poor response. The representative drug pembrolizumab contains an antibody that blocks PD-1 protein on the surface of T-cells, and chemotherapy as a first-line treatment is useful for the treatment of PD-L1-positive metastatic TNBC. CSCs are not just resistant to chemotherapy but also immunotherapy. Whether the PL-L1 of CSCs is related to the formation of breast CSCs is unknown. Transcription factors of the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) family regulating the immune responses have five members: c-Rel, p65 (RelA), RelB, p105/p50 (NF-κB1), and p100/p52 (NF-κB2). The NF-κB pathway activation plays an important role in the progression of BC, and levels of RelB protein are known to be very high in aggressive BC tissues, particularly in TNBC. RelB induced cell mobility and inhibited apoptosis of BC. RelB increased the proliferation of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) through IMP3- and LIN28-mediated regulation. The constitutive activated NF-κB (p65/p50) has been seen in many tumor types and CSCs. However, whether the RelB of CSCs is related to breast CSC formation is unknown. In our study, we showed a novel molecular mechanism of breast CSC formation by BRD4/nuclear PD-L1/RelB axis in vitro and in vivo.