Discussion In this study we show that mHTT ultrasensitive detection assay signal is dependent on many factors beyond protein concentration, including fragmentation, protein-protein interaction, affinity tag positioning, oligomerization and polyglutamine tract length. Additionally, we demonstrate that MW1 has preference but not specificity for mHTT and can bind wildtype HTT, albeit with reduced affinity compared to disease-range polyQ tract length proteoforms of mHTT. Biological fluid samples from HD animal models and patients, such as CSF, contain a heterogenous mix of mHTT and wildtype HTT species, including fragments and oligomeric assemblies, subsets of which could be detected with different antibody pairs in ultrasensitive immunoassays. However, to absolutely quantify mHTT, wildtype HTT or total HTT, many different antibody pairs and protein standards would have to be used and interpreting overlapping signals in these assays to absolutely define the precise mHTT proteoform composition in a sample would be very challenging. Another caveat in capturing different HTT proteoforms in immunoassays it that HTT antibody generation has been historically focused on targeting the N-terminal region of the protein, especially epitopes within the exon 1 region of the protein. It is possible that C-terminal fragments of HTT that arise from different proteolytic cleavage events are still not accounted for with the antibodies currently used in these assays. HTT is a protein scaffold in both its wildtype and disease forms, forming complex 3D structural assemblies of multi-protein complexes. Whether any of the interactions are maintained for extracellular HTT in different biofluid samples is unclear. This is an important consideration for HTT detection assays as some HTT protein-protein interactions almost certainly shield or occlude HTT antibody-epitope binding and thus alter assay signal. We demonstrate that buffer conditions of different stringency can alter assay signal arising from apo HTT compared to HTT in complex with HAP40. Ensuring all proteoforms are detected would be critical for absolute determination of “total” HTT protein levels, which cannot be achieved with current technology. Our data demonstrate that mHTT detection assay signal is influenced by polyQ tract length, corroborating the findings of others. MW1 interaction with HTT is dependent on the polyQ tract length, showing preference but not specificity for disease-length polyQ tracts for both the denatured and native full-length HTT protein. This finding means that even measuring a single form or fragment of mHTT in a cohort of patient samples would be very difficult given the variation of polyQ tract length between individuals and even within a single patient sample due to variation over the disease course which arises due to somatic expansion. This mismatch in polyQ tract length protein standards and biological samples accounts for the mHTT detection paradox where mHTT levels exceed total HTT quantified in a single sample due to vastly different antibody-protein stoichiometry and therefore assay signal between antibody pairs used to detect HTT. This finding is applicable to other polyQ containing proteins where polyQ tract expansion also occurs during disease as we demonstrate with our analysis of wildtype and SCA3 representative ataxin-3 proteins. Even with these caveats in mind, ultrasensitive HTT detection assays still have an important role to play in our evaluation of HTT as a biomarker of HD, and for assessment of target engagement of HTT-lowering therapeutics. We propose the recommendations laid out in Box 1, which advocate for relative quantitation of HTT to be reported by such assays rather than reporting HTT protein concentration, and that mHTT depletion assays are reconsidered as an approach to measure wildtype HTT. Relative reporting of assay data will also allow data interoperability and comparison across different clinical and preclinical studies.