Materials and methods Chemicals The pan-BET inhibitor, (+)-JQ, and PD-L1 degrader, verteporfin, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). BRD4 degrader, ARV825, and RelB inhibitor, calcitriol, were purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth, NJ, USA). 3',4',7,8-tetrahydroxyflavone (THF), the BRD4 natural inhibitory compound, was purchased from Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, UK). Cell culture and culture conditions MDA-MB-231, MCF-7 and HCC1937 cells were received from the Korea Cell Line Bank (Seoul, Republic of Korea). 4T1 cell were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). MDA-MB-231 and HCC1937 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). 4T1 and MC38 cells were purchased from Kerafast Inc. (Boston, MA, USA). 4T1 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). MC38 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 0.1 mM nonessential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM Hepes, 25 µg/mL gentamycin sulfate, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Cells were incubated at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cell culture ware, including cell culture dishes and plates, was purchased from SPL Life Sciences Co. (Pocheon-si, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea). CSC formation For mammosphere formation, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, 4T1 and HCC1937 cells (1 × 104 cells /mL) were cultured in a cell floater plate containing MammoCult™ medium (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, CA) with heparin and hydrocortisone and incubated at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 for 7 days. For colon tumorsphere formation, MC38 cells (2 × 104 cells/mL) were seeded in a cell floater plate containing Cancer Stem Premium Media (ProMab Biotechnologies Inc., Richmond, CA, USA) and incubated at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 for 5–7 days. To count CSCs, plates were scanned and analyzed using the NICE program. The CSC formation assay was determined by evaluating mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) or tumorsphere formation efficiency (TFE) (%). Cell floater plates, including 6-well ultra-low attachment plates, were obtained from Corning (Corning, NY, USA) and SPL Life Sciences Co. (Pocheon-si, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea). Cell proliferation MDA-MB-231 and HCC1937 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and incubated for 24 h. The cells were treated with increasing concentrations of (+)-JQ1, ARV825, verteporfin, calcitriol, and THF for 24 h. The cell viability assay followed the manufacturer’s protocol of EZ-Cytox (Dogenbio, Seoul, South Korea). Then, 10 µL of EZ-Cytox solution was added per well. After incubation at 37 °C for 1 h, a VersaMax ELISA Microplate Reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA) was used for measurement at OD450. Target gene knockdown using small interfering RNA (siRNA) To investigate the effects of BRD4, PD-L1, and RelB on mammosphere formation, MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with specific siRNAs. siRNAs and scrambled siRNAs used in the study were obtained from Bioneer (Daejeon, South Korea). For the knockdown of target genes, cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Whether knockdown succeeded by checking the levels of siRNA proteins through immunoblotting using target antibodies was determined. Transient transfection of pEGFP-N1/PD-L1 plasmid MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured at 70% confluent on the day of transfection. Transient transfection was performed in a 6-well plate using Invitrogen™ Lipofectamine™ 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and 2 µg of the PD-L1 expression plasmid, pEGFP-N1/PD-L1 (Addgene, Watertown, MA, USA). After transfection, The PD-L1 and GFP levels were determined using anti-PD-L1 and anti-GFP. RNA isolation and reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) The total RNA was purified using MiniBEST Universal RNA Extraction Kit (Takara, Tokyo, Japan). RT-qPCR was performed using a TOPreal™ One-step RT-qPCR Kit (Enzynomics, Daejeon, South Korea). Our studies followed the manufacturer’s protocol. GAPDH primer was synthesized, and other primers (CD44, c-Myc, OCT4, SOX2, PD-L1, RelB, interleukin-6 [IL-6], and IL-8) were purchased in Bioneer. The GAPDH gene has been experimented with for use as an internal control. Primer sequences that were used to perform RT-qPCR are shown in Table 1. Immunoblot and immunoprecipitation Cancer cells and CSCs were treated with drugs, (+)-JQ1, ARV825, verteporfin, calcitriol, caffeic acid, and THF for 24 h, and cancer cells were centrifuged and lysed using RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. The fractionated proteins of cells were treated using a subcellular protein fractionation kit for cultured cells. The fractionated proteins of cells were isolated using a subcellular protein fractionation kit for cultured cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lysates were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and electro-transferred to Immobilon®-FL polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). After that, we followed LI-COR (Lincoln, NE, USA) fluorescent Western blot detection protocol. The membrane was blocked with Odyssey® Blocking Buffer for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. The primary antibody was added using the vendor’s recommendations, and the blot was incubated overnight at 4 °C. After the membranes were washed, they were incubated with fluorescent-labeled secondary antibodies for 1 h. The protein bands of the membranes were detected and quantitated using an Odyssey CLx imaging machine (LI-COR). To detect the interaction protein of RelB, we used Puredown Protein A/G-Agarose (GenDEPOT, Katy, TX, USA) for pulldown reactions. The beads were then washed with lysis buffer and finally eluted using lysis buffer followed by Western blot analysis. The antibodies used are as follows: anti-BRD4, anti-PD-L1, anti-RelB, anti-NF-κB, anti-c-Myc (Cell Signaling Technology; CST, Danvers, MA, USA), anti-α-tubulin, anti-vimentin, anti-β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), anti-ATPase (Novus Biologicals, Minneapolis, MN, USA), anti-PD-L1 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and anti-Lamin-B (Invitrogen). Flow cytometry analysis For detecting only BCSCs in cancers, cancer cells were stained with specific marker proteins using antibodies such as FITC anti-CD44 and APC anti-CD24 (BD, San Jose, CA, USA) to define CD44+/CD24-BCSCs. Single-cell suspensions were prepared from mouse tumor tissues or TDLNs to analyze the T-cells. The processes of tissue sample preparation are described in “Subcutaneous tumor and TDLN resection and sample preparation” section. Cells were stained with specific antibodies as APC anti-mouse CD8a, APC anti-mouse CD4, and FITC anti-mouse CD3 (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) to define CD8+/CD3 + cytotoxic T-cells or CD4+/CD3 + helper T-cells. The samples were analyzed by flow cytometry (Accuri C6, BD Biosciences, East Rutherford, NJ, USA). ALDH detecting assay ALDH detection was examined using an ALDEFUOR kit (STEMCELL Technologies). Assays were according to the vendor’s recommendation protocol. MDA-MB-231 cells, HCC1937 and MC 38 cells were cultured in 6-well plates and incubated for 24 h. The cells were incubated in ALDEFLUOR™ Reagent at 37 °C for 20 min. ALDH-positive cells were analyzed by performing a flow cytometer (Accuri C6, BD Biosciences). Single-cell suspensions were prepared from mouse tumor tissues or TDLNs to analyze CSCs. Samples containing diethylaminobenzaldehyde were used as negative controls. The processes of tissue sample preparation are described in “Subcutaneous tumor and TDLN resection and sample preparation” section. After sample preparation, the method is the same as described above. Luciferase assay PD-L1-specific reporter plasmid, pGL3 1 kb promoter was received from Addgene (Watertown, MT, USA). Cancer cells were transfected with reporter plasmid using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). PD-L1 reporter gene was analyzed with a luciferase assay system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and a luminometer. β-Galactosidase reporter gene was analyzed with Galacto-Light Plus™ β-Galactosidase Reporter Gene Assay System (Invitrogen) and has been experimented with for use as an internal control. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay To explore protein–DNA interactions, we used the cleavage under targets and release using nuclease method. To isolate the protein–DNA complex of interest, cells were harvested and bound to concanavalin A-coated magnetic beads. After binding, the membrane was permeabilized by the treatment of digitonin, and antibodies were bound to the transcription factor of interest. For DNA digestion, pAG-MNase fusion protein and Ca2+ were added. DNA was collected using DNA spin columns. The purified, enriched DNA was identified and quantitated by PCR using AccuPower® 2X GreenStar™ qPCR Master Mix (Bioneer). Information on primers and binding sites following the described supplemental data are provided in Figs. S2 and S3. Cytokine profiling using flow cytometric analysis MDA-MB-231-derived CSCs were seeded in an ultra-low attachment 6-well plate. After 6 days, the cells were treated with 1 µM (+)-JQ1, 0.1 µM ARV825, 2 µM Verteporfin, 50 µM calcitriol, and 20 µM caffeic acid for 24 h. The cytokine profiling of cells was assessed in a supernatant culture medium using Human Inflammatory Cytokine Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) (BD Biosciences) and FACS. The procedures followed the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were measured by flow cytometry (Accuri C6, BD Biosciences). CBA data were analyzed and quantitated using BD FCAP array software. Cytokine quantitation using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) MC38 cells (2.5 × 105 cells/mL) were cultured in a 6-well plate. MC38 cells were treated with 200 µM THF for 18 h. IL-6 was measured in a supernatant culture medium. The amount of IL-6 was measured by ELISA MAX™ Deluxe Set Mouse IL-6 (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The absorbance was measured using a VersaMax ELISA microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Mice Female C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice, 5 or 6 weeks old (Samtako, Osan-si, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea) were used for animal studies. The animal studies were approved the by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC-2022-031) of Jeju National University. Tumor subcutaneous induction and treatment MC38 and 4T1 cells were harvested at four passages. After being washed, the cells were resuspended in the Matrigel matrix media (Corning Inc., NY, USA). Mice were shaved at the right flank before cancer cell injection. MC38 cells (5 × 105 cells/mice) and 4T1 cells (5 × 105 cells/mice) were injected subcutaneously into the right hind flank of each mouse. From day 6 after tumor inoculation, tumor-bearing mice were injected with THF (10 mg/kg, DMSO) every 2–3 days. The mice were randomly divided into different experimental groups. Tumor length and width were measured every 2–3 days, and the tumor volume was calculated using the formula: (length × width2)/2. Subcutaneous tumor and TDLN resection and sample preparation To identify the TDLNs of mice, 100 µL of 1% Evans blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with saline was injected into the subcutaneous tumor. TDLNs of the right inguinal were visually identified after treatment with Evans blue for 60 min. When subcutaneous tumors reached a volume of approximately 4000 m3, mice were sacrificed. Subcutaneous tumors and dyed TDLNs were resected, and cell suspensions were prepared mechanically. After being harvested, single-cell suspensions were prepared for use in FACS analysis. Small cut tumor pieces and TDLNs were incubated with ACCUMAX (Innovative Cell Technologies, San Diego, CA, USA) at room temperature for 1 h with shaking. Then, the tissues were meshed and filtered through a 70-µm cell strainer. The cell suspension was harvested, and a single-cell suspension was obtained. Availability of data and materials The datasets used for the current study are available corresponding author on reasonable request. Declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate The mice experiments were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Jeju National University (IACUC-JNU 2022-0032). This study was approved by the ethical review committee of Jeju National University. Consent for publication Not applicable.