Discussion  Leishmania spp. utilize parasitic virulence factors such as GP63, LPG-1, and EF-1 to drive immunopathology in their mammalian hosts by acting on host immune cells and abrogating leishmanicidal functions. Over the last decade, several research groups have studied the role of leishmanial exosomes in immunopathogenesis, though the lack of specific markers for these extracellular vesicles remains a major challenge in the field. For our study, we used serial differential ultracentrifugation as previously described by Kowal et al. to isolate three distinct populations of Leishmania spp.-derived extracellular vesicles – 2K, 10K and 100K fractions – corresponding to large vesicles (e.g., apoptotic bodies), intermediate-sized vesicles (e.g., ectosomes), and small vesicles (e.g., exosomes). While this technique results in the recovery of distinct EV populations with different size distributions, for which the major component is the vesicle class of interest, cross-contamination between fractions is possible due to the heterogenous EV sizes. Data collected using both TEM and NTA suggested that each fraction contained a distinct extracellular vesicle population, and that the fraction containing small vesicles/exosomes (100K) was composed of relatively homogeneous EVs with a smaller diameter than that observed in other fractions ( Figure 1 ). Direct (TEM) and indirect (NTA) morphological analysis confirmed this, validating our isolation and fractionation methods. These results are in agreement with Kowal et al.’s work on dendritic cell-derived EVs, whereby homogenous EV populations with distinct morphological characteristics were recovered in each fraction, though they recovered larger populations of small EVs (<200 nm). This is likely due to the methodology underlying leishmanial exosome isolation, as a temperature shift is used to stimulate EV production, inducing the packaging of heat shock proteins and large stress-induced cargo. Further, as distributions are similar but slightly shifted towards larger EVs, this finding is a potential artifact of the use of different nanoparticle tracking analysis machinery. LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis and downstream bioinformatic mapping of the fractionated EV populations further corroborated the divergence of EV subpopulations in each fraction. Functional characterization with protein-protein interaction analysis (StringDB) indicated that the proteins detected in EV subpopulations had distinct functionality. While mitochondrial proteins formed an important cluster in the 10K fraction, exocytosis and MVB formation associated proteins were unique to the 100K fraction – an observation which validates the origin of the small extracellular vesicles, as these functions are directly related to known pathways for the intracellular formation and outtake of exosomes by eukaryotic cells. However, mitochondrial-related proteins would have been expected in the 2K fraction rather than the 10K fraction, considering apoptotic bodies use mitochondrial pathways for their formation. This finding is likely due to the overlap of intermediate and large-sized vesicles during the isolation process, with potential precipitation of larger vesicles within the 10K fractions or co-precipitation of free mitochondrial fragments along with this fraction. Though this highlights a potential technical limitation of EV isolation, Gene Ontology Analysis (PANTHER-db) revealed an overall decrease of proteins of mitochondrial origin from the 2K fraction to the 10K fraction, indicating that the 2K fraction is the most enriched in apoptotic bodies. Further, proteins of vacuolar origin are most abundant in the 100K fraction, suggesting the presence of exosomes, as their biogenesis requires the formation of vacuoles within multivesicular bodies using the ESCRT pathway. Several proteins involved in this pathway, such as CHMP2A, CHMP2B, SNF-7, and VTA1, which are essential to this process, are uniquely detected within the 100K fractions, validating its composition in small extracellular vesicles with exosome characteristics. Moreover, quantitative analysis of the proteomes of each fraction enabled the identification of protein sets that were common and enriched in one fraction of EVs or the other. Of notable interest is the inverse relationship between upregulated and downregulated proteins in the 2K and 100K fractions, as visualized heat map, indicating minimal overlap between these protein sets. This not only confirms that minimal contamination by the other class of EVs occurred in the extremum fractions, but also highlights the vastly different roles these EVs play. Further, moderate overlap of the 10K fraction with both the 2K and 10K fraction suggests the presence of low numbers of other EV populations, though a clearly enriched set of proteins indicates relative purity of the preparation. PPI analysis of enriched protein sets permitted the identification of clusters related to the Histone Complex, Signal Transduction, Transcription/Ribosomal, and Cellular Respiration in the 2K complex. In contrast, clusters related to Endoplasmic Glycosylation, the Cysteine Pathway, and the Vacuolar Sorting/ESCRT pathway were identified in the 100K fraction ( Figures 4C, E ). This observation reiterates the importance of the ESCRT pathway in exosome formation within the cell – a pathway that has been experimentally demonstrated by several research groups. Although the association between exosomes and both the endoplasmic glycosylation and cysteine pathways is less clear, these clusters may be due to the importance of the ER and the Golgi apparatus in cargo sorting before packaging and trafficking into exosomes. Further studies are necessary to elucidate a clear link between these two processes and the eukaryotic cell production of small extracellular vesicles. Though minimal overlap exists between the proteomes of leishmanial EVs and that identified in Kowal et al.’s study of mammalian exosomes, largely due to the absence of homologous proteins across the studied organisms, the overall functionality of the proteomes varies across EV populations in a similar way, as visualized by the step-wise decrease in mitochondrial proteins as EVs decrease in size. On the other hand, the volcano plots used to quantitatively analyze protein sets provided evidence of differential protein expression levels among the fractions. The 100K fraction was found to be enriched with key parasitic virulence factors, such as EF-1, GP63, and superoxide dismutase, when compared to both the 2K and 10K fractions. This finding is consistent with previous studies on Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes. Furthermore, glycolysis-related proteins, including enolase and pyruvate kinase, were found to be enriched in both the 2K and 10K fractions, suggesting the presence of EVs associated with aerobic metabolism, such as apoptotic bodies and ectosomes. Thus, it can be concluded that the 100K fraction contains a unique population of EVs, likely of exosomal origin. Similarly, recent studies on Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes have used markers such as HSP70 and HSP83 and the parasitic virulence factors GP63 and EF-1 to identify this group of EVs. However, both HSP70 and HSP83 were detected in all three EV fractions, indicating that these markers are non-specific. While serial differential ultracentrifugation does not permit the recovery of completely homogenous EV fractions, should this non-specificity be a result of exosomal contamination in other EV fractions, lower abundance of these canonical markers would be expected in larger EV fractions. Thus, the similar abundance of HSP70 and HSP83 across EV populations suggests that this is not an artifact of contamination, but rather the result of the proteins being packaged in all EVs. This finding mirrors data published by Kowal et al., whereby canonical markers of mammalian exosomes are similarly non-specific to small extracellular vesicles. Levels of GP63, Enolase, and Surface Antigen Protein increased throughout the fractions, with the highest concentration found in the 100K fraction, further suggesting that these EVs are exosomes, which tend which tend to accumulate high concentrations of parasitic virulence factors. Notably, the enrichment in GP63 suggests that the parasite actively uses these vesicles to deliver parasitic proteins into mammalian host immune cells, which have immunomodulatory effects. The abundance of GP63 has also been shown to be highest in exosomes produced by infective metacyclic- and stationary-stage parasites, while exhibiting much lower levels in logarithmic-stage parasites – a finding that further implicates exosome-secreted GP63 in the immunopathogenesis of leishmaniasis. Together, this suggests differential expression of GP63 in a life cycle-dependent manner, and intentional sorting of the surface metalloprotease into exosomal cargo. Additional studies addressing the content of all extracellular vesicle classes at different life stages may provide more insight into this process. Furthermore, several proteins, including SNF-7, Qc-SNARE, IST1, SNF-7 superfamily, CHMP2B, ALIX, and VPS37, were detected exclusively in the 100K fraction. These proteins play a role in the ESCRT pathway, which is responsible for the endosomal formation and trafficking of small extracellular vesicles, including exosomes. Although these proteins are relatively conserved between species, they have specificity for small extracellular vesicles. Thus, they may be effective markers for identifying Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes, despite the limitations of identifying exosomes of leishmanial origin in a heterogenous mixture of vesicles from different organisms. Other proteins identified in this study include parasitic phosphatases such as PP5 and PRL-1, which have previously been identified as virulence factors secreted by Leishmania spp. via the exosomal pathway. PRL-1 is a Leishmania-specific protein, and was uniquely detected in the 100K fraction, indicating that it could be used as a marker for identifying leishmanial exosomes. In fact, all PRL-1 homologous proteins indexed in UniProt’s database are expressed exclusively by species of Leishmania, minimizing the risk of cross-identification with other organisms. In summary, our study utilized a comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of small EVs collected through serial differential ultracentrifugation, which was further validated to identify potential proteomic markers of Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes. These include ESCRT proteins SNF-7, Qc-SNARE, IST1, VTA1, CHMP2B, ALIX, and VPS37, as well as the parasitic phosphatase PRL-1. While ESCRT proteins may be conserved between organisms, PRL-1 shows promise as an organism-specific exosome marker and requires further investigation. Further studies are necessary to assess whether these markers are shared by other Leishmania, including species causing visceral and mucocutaneous infection. Our findings provide valuable insight and advancements in the identification of EVs of non-mammalian origin, challenging the use of certain commonly used markers in the identification of Leishmania spp.-derived extracellular vesicles/exosomes. Moreover, we describe potential new exosome production-related markers (ESCRT-related), like VPS37, and parasite-specific markers like PRL-1, which may enhance the specificity of EV identification or isolation procedures, particularly for Leishmania spp.-derived exosomes (summarized in  Figure 6 ). Follow-up studies to this exploratory work may provide valuable insight into the sensitivity of these markers in immunohistochemistry.