Fractions of Leishmania major-derived extracellular vesicles display distinct morphologic characteristics. Fractionated EV populations derived from Leishmania major are analyzed by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) to determine diameter distributions of particles present in the (A) 2K, (B) 10K, and (C) 100K fractions (left). Corresponding Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images (right) show representative EV morphology within each fraction. Bar, 100nm; Magnification, 30000x; or Bar, 500nm; Magnification, 9300x. Protein-protein interaction networks of total proteins detected in fractions of Leishmania major-derived extracellular vesicles display notable variations. Networks were generated using total proteins detected by LC-MS/MS in (A) 2K, (B) 10K, and (C) 100K fractions of Leishmania major-derived EVs. In the 2K/apoptotic body fraction (A), notable clusters include the Nucleotide Salvage Pathway, Ribosomal, Chaperone, Signal transduction, Glycolysis and the Tryparedoxin pathway. In the 10K/Ectosome fraction (B), clustering patterns include Proteasome, Chaperone, Tryparedoxin pathway, Translation/tRNA, Ribosome, Signal transduction, Glycolysis, Lipophosphoglycan biosynthesis, Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, and Flagella. In the 100K/exosome fraction (C) clusters include Glycolysis, Signal transduction, Chaperone, Proteasome, Translation/tRNA, Ribosome, along with unique clusters representing Multivesicular Body Formation and Exocytosis. Protein-protein interaction networks of the identified proteins were created using String database () using the highest confidence of interaction (>0.900), showing only connected proteins in the network and using an MCL inflation parameter of 3. Gene Ontology analysis of total proteins detected in fractions of Leishmania major-derived extracellular vesicles display notable variations. Proteins detected by LC-MS/MS in 2K, 10K, and 100K fractions of Leishmania major-derived EVs were annotated using PANTHER (pantherdb.org) gene ontology analysis (GO) according to (A) Biological Processes, (B) Molecular Function, and (C) Cellular Component (Level 3 – membrane-bound organelle). When classified according to biological processes and molecular functions, no significant changes are apparent in terms of percentage of the total classified proteins. Most significant differences are regarding the cellular component, suggesting that the cellular origins of the EV fractions are (A) mitochondrial, (B) nuclear and (C) vacuolar/endosomal. Fractions of Leishmania major-derived extracellular vesicles display distinct quantitative proteomic profiles and functionality. The protein content of Leishmania major-derived EVs was catalogued by mass spectrometry (L. major database) using biological triplicates obtained for each fraction (n=3) and analyzed using Mascot followed by Scaffold Software. Quantitative profiles are represented both in absolute expression using (A) a Venn diagram, and in relative expression using (B) a heat map. Enrichment of proteins detected by LC-MS/MS was determined using ANOVA without corrections (p<0.05) on pre-established true-hit proteins. Enrichment was defined as expression levels greater than 2 standard deviations from the mean of all LC-MS/MS samples. The heat map was generated using Z-scores (calculation provided in materials and methods) without normalization, clustered into groups based on protein sets exhibiting positive Z-scores in each group. Protein-protein interaction networks of enriched proteins were generated using enriched proteins detected by LC-MS/MS in (C) 2K, (D) 10K, and (E) 100K fractions of Leishmania major-derived EVs. Notable protein clusters for each fraction included: (C) Histone Complex, Signal Transduction, Transcription/Ribosomal, and Cellular Respiration in the 2K fraction; (D) no notable clusters in the 10K fraction; and (E) clusters associated to Endoplasmic Glycosylation, Cysteine Pathway, and Vacuolar Sorting/ESCRT pathway in the 100K fraction. Protein-protein interaction networks of the identified proteins were created using String database () using the highest confidence of interaction (>0.900), showing only connected proteins in the network and using an MCL inflation parameter of 3. Fractions of Leishmania major-derived extracellular vesicles display distinct uniquely expressed proteins. (A) The protein content of Leishmania major-derived EVs was catalogued by mass spectrometry (L. major database) using biological triplicates obtained for each fraction (n=3) and analyzed using Mascot followed by Scaffold Software. Total proteins detected by LC-MS/MS in each fraction were determined using inclusion criteria of a minimum of 2 detected peptides, a peptide threshold of 80%, and a protein identity of 95%. Uniqueness was then determined based on a true hit being identified in only one of the fractions. (B) A protein-protein interaction networks of uniquely expressed proteins in the 100K fraction was generated using unique proteins detected by LC-MS/MS in the 100K fraction of Leishmania major-derived EVs. Notable proteins include SNF-7, Qc-SNARE, IST1, SNF-7 superfamily, VTA1, CHMP2B, ALIX, and VPS37 were identified in this group, which are part of the ESCRT pathway, and PP5 and PRL-1 which are parasite phosphatases were also identified. The protein-protein interaction network was created using String database () using the highest confidence of interaction (>0.900), showing only connected proteins in the network and using an MCL inflation parameter of 3. – All-Atom Scale Model of Mammalian and Leishmanial Exosomes. The cross section of a 100 nm extracellular vesicle is shown, containing protein markers of mammalian exosomes (left) and leishmanial exosomes (right). Established biomarkers of mammalian exosomes include the tetraspanins CD63, CD9 and CD81, the chaperones HSP70 and HSP90, tumor susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101), GTPase, and ALIX. Proteins found to be enriched in leishmanial exosomes include the ESCRT proteins Vacuolar-sorting protein SNF7 (SNF-7), Qc soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor-attachment protein receptor (Qc-SNARE), Vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein IST1 (IST1), Vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein VTA1 (VTA1), Charged multivesicular body protein 2b (CHMP2B), Vacuolar-sorting protein BRO1 (ALIX), and Vacuolar-sorting protein 37 (VPS37), which are involved in exosome biogenesis, along with the species-specific protein tyrosine phosphatase PRL-1 (PRL-1). This image was generated using multiple software as described in materials and methods.