Methods  Yeast strains and media:  We employed standard yeast genetics techniques to create and maintain the strain utilized in this study (Moreno et al., 1991). Typically, cells were cultured on agar plates containing YE5S media at a temperature of 25⁰C.  For microscopy experiments, a small number of cells were inoculated into liquid YE5S medium the night before the experiment. The culture was then incubated at 25⁰C with continuous shaking overnight until it reached an optical density OD 600nm ≈ 0.5 absorbance units. At this point, the cells were harvested for imaging. The cells were mounted in YE5S media within 2% agar using custom-made PDMS chambers, as previously described  .   Microscopy:   Imaging was conducted using a spinning disk confocal microscope setup  . Specifically, we utilized a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 inverted microscope equipped with a Nikon CFI Plan Fluor 100x/1.4 NA objective lens, a Nikon Perfect Focus System (PFS), a Mad City Labs integrated Nano-View XYZ micro- and nano-positioner, a Yokogawa Spinning Disk CSU-X1 unit, a Photometrics Evolve EMCCD camera, and a Gataca Systems solid-state laser unit with 488 nm (100 mW) and 561 nm (100 mW) lines, controlled by Molecular Devices MetaMorph 8.0 software. The microscope was enclosed inside a Life Imaging Services thermal box, with temperature controlled via forced air from the thermal Cube. The temperature can be maintained stably at the set point ± 1⁰C.  To capture the images, we acquired z-stacks consisting of 7 focal planes spaced 1 µm apart in the GFP (Exposure time: 100 ms) and mCherry (Exposure time: 100 ms) channels. A corresponding brightfield image (Exposure: 50 ms) was acquired to visualize cells. The stacks were acquired through time-lapse, depending on the specific temperature, between 1 to 3.5 hr, at 0.5 min to 2 min intervals.  Analysis:   Maximun-projection time-lapsed movies were visualized and analysed by ImageJ/FIJI  . Statistical analysis was performed using Google Sheets. Plots were generated using GraphPad Prism.  Reagents  Strain used: TP. 3640 h+ mCherry- Atb2 :HygR Hht2 -GFP: Ura4