Discussion Glucocorticoids have been reported to induce diverse effects via genomic and non-genomic mechanisms in the mammalian brain. In the present study, we, for the first time, reported that glucocorticoids rapidly increase the Kv2.2 channel currents in neurons through the glucocorticoid receptors on the cell membrane. We further investigated the underlying signaling pathway and found that phosphorylation of the ERK1/2 pathway, but not the PKA or PKC pathways, was involved in the rapid non-genomic modulation. Our findings may provide a new universal mechanism for glucocorticoid-induced non-genomic effects in the central nervous system. The glucocorticoid-modulated effect on ion channels via classical genomic pathways, such as increasing cardiac sodium channel expression in the fetal ovine heart and epithelial sodium channel expression in fetal and adult guinea pig lungs, typically takes more than a few hours. A recent study also reported that corticosterone increases acid-sensing ion channel expression in rat hippocampal neurons. However, there are few reports on glucocorticoid's rapid effect (within minutes) on ion channels. A previous study reported that cortisol rapidly inhibits Kv1.5 current in Xenopus oocytes. Furthermore, the downstream signaling pathway of the glucocorticoid-induced rapid effect on ion channels remains elusive. Ffrench-Mullen reported that cortisol rapidly inhibits L-type calcium channels in hippocampal pyramidal neurons via the PKC signaling pathway. Previous studies have suggested that the specific kinase pathways involved in mediating the rapid effects of glucocorticoids can vary depending on the cellular context. For example, in the hippocampus, glucocorticoids have been found to enhance CA1 pyramidal excitability through activation of ERK1/2 kinase, whereas in the hypothalamus, they have been shown to inhibit glutamatergic synaptic activity of PVN parvocellular neurons through activation of the PKC pathway. In human bronchial epithelial cells, dexamethasone has been shown to decrease intracellular Ca2+ by activating PKA, whereas in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells, dexamethasone has been reported to increase intracellular Ca2+ by deactivating ERK1/2 kinase. In the present study, we demonstrated that the rapid effect of glucocorticoids on Kv2.2 channels is associated with the activation of ERK instead of PKC, suggesting a variety of downstream glucocorticoid signaling pathways. The membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptor is derived from the same gene as the classical cytosolic glucocorticoid receptor and has been reported to be widely expressed in various cell types. Glucocorticoids rapidly regulate BK and Kv1.3 channels via unknown membrane receptors or direct interaction with the channel. Our study provides direct evidence that glucocorticoids increase the Kv2.2 current through membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptors with bath application of BSA-dexamethasone and RU486, the membrane-impermeable agonist and antagonist of the glucocorticoid receptors, respectively. After binding to the glucocorticoid receptor, glucocorticoids could further modulate the activities of various kinases, including PKA, PKC, and ERK. Previous studies have shown that dexamethasone rapidly (within 5 min) decreases the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in human leukemia cell lines Nalm-6 and Reh and that BSA-conjugated corticosterone rapidly (within 15 min) inhibits the NMDA-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in cultured hippocampal neurons. However, Qiu et al. reported that corticosterone and BSA-conjugated corticosterone rapidly (within 15 min) activate ERK1/2 in PC12 cells. Our results also confirm that cortisol rapidly increases ERK1/2 activities in HEK293 cells and cortical neurons. These results indicate that the rapid effect of glucocorticoids on ERK1/2 could be diverse among different cell types. However, the underlying mechanisms that activate ERK1/2 through membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptors need further investigation. The Kv2 family of voltage-gated potassium channels contains Kv2.1 and Kv2.2. The Kv2.1 channel has been reported to be widely expressed in the brain. However, previous studies have shown that the Kv2.2 channels were preferentially expressed in layer 2 pyramidal neurons, the basal forebrain, and the MNTB neurons. Kv2 channels are high voltage-activated (HVA) channels with slow activation kinetics and, therefore, contribute little to the resting membrane potential and single AP properties. Consistent with this, we found that cortisol did not change the resting membrane potentials and single AP properties in layer 2 pyramidal neurons and calyx-type synapses in the MNTB (Fig. 5, Fig. 6). The effect of Kv2 on neuronal activity can be excitatory or inhibitory. Kv2 channels have been shown to facilitate repetitive AP firing by promoting recovery of voltage-gated sodium channels from inactivation. Inhibition of Kv2 channels could reduce the repetitive firing in MNTB neurons while increasing the fidelity of repetitive firing in dorsal root ganglia neurons. In previous studies, dexamethasone rapidly increased basal nitric oxide production in human endothelial cells and enhanced ATP-induced nitric oxide production in spiral ganglion neurons. Steinert et al. reported that the potentiation of Kv2 currents by nitric oxide reduces the excitability of MNTB and hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons, indicating a potential role of nitric oxide in the rapid effect of glucocorticoids on neuronal Kv2.2. Interestingly, in the present study, we found that either inhibition of Kv2.2 with antibodies or activation of Kv2.2 by cortisol reduced the firing rate in the pyramidal cortical neurons and presynaptic nerve terminals at the calyx of Held synapses (Fig. 6E–H), suggesting that Kv2.2 plays a key role in fine-tuning the repetitive neuronal firing upon stimulation. Moreover, we observed that cortisol could strongly enhance synaptic depression upon high-frequency stimulation. At calyces, the presynaptic AP firing rate can be 50 Hz in the resting condition and increase to more than 600 Hz upon stimulation. The enhanced inhibition during high-frequency stimulation may provide a certain level of protection for prompt and accurate synaptic transmission. Although the functions of rapid glucocorticoid actions in the brain are not fully understood, one of their main functions is fast feedback regulation of the HPA axis. Glucocorticoids directly suppress HPA activity by rapidly suppressing excitation of the corticotropin-releasing hormone neurons in hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN), and can also exert positive or negative regulation of the HPA axis through rapid action on the hippocampus or amygdala. Previous studies suggested that glucocorticoid receptors in the prefrontal cortex were involved in the negative feedback regulation of stress-induced HPA activation. The projection of the prefrontal cortex to PVN neuroendocrine cells is through local interneurons, majority of which are GABAergic. Therefore, the inhibitory glucocorticoid action in cortical neurons may be expected to produce fast activation of the HPA axis. However, studies have also shown the presence of local glutamate excitatory synaptic inputs to PVN neurons. In addition, frontal cortex stimulation has been shown to stimulate corticosterone secretion in rats, and local application of glucocorticoids in the medial frontal cortex inhibits stress-induced HPA activation, suggesting that the rapid inhibitory effect of glucocorticoids on the actions of prefrontal cortical neurons may provide fast negative feedback regulation of stress-induced HPA activation. Under non-stress conditions, glucocorticoids are secreted in pulsatile patterns following circadian rhythms, with concentration ranging from tens to hundreds of nanomolars in both rats and mice. However, under stress conditions, peak glucocorticoid levels can reach micromolar levels. Our study revealed that 100 nM of cortisol caused a slight increase in Kv2.2 currents in cultured HEK293 cells, and 1 μM of cortisol significantly increased the Kv2.2 currents by approximately 25%, with the effect peaking at 10 μM. A previous study indicates that the drug concentration at the cell surface is about 3.4 times lower than the perfusion concentration in brain slices. Thus, we used 10 μM cortisol throughout our study, reflecting a physiological dose range. A previous study suggested that glucocorticoids could reverse the cochlear acoustic hypersensitivity induced by adrenalectomy and protect from acoustic trauma. In addition, Kv2.2 activity in the ventral nucleus of the trapezoid body and MNTB of the central auditory brainstem has been implicated in noise-induced hearing loss. These results indicate that the inhibitory action of glucocorticoids on Kv2.2 plays a role in glucocorticoid-induced regulation of hearing. In summary, our results demonstrate that glucocorticoids could rapidly facilitate Kv2.2 currents via the membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptors and activation of downstream ERK1/2 signaling pathways, leading to the modulation of neuronal excitability in the pyramidal cortical neurons and calyx of Held synapses. Our study provides the first evidence that glucocorticoids regulate neural activity via a rapid non-genomic effect on Kv2.2 channels.