TDP43RRM1 interactions with (TG)6 ssDNA and
(GT)12 ssDNA by EMSA (a,b) and CG-MALS (c–f). (a,b)
EMSA of TDP43RRM1 and (TG)6 ssDNA (a) and (GT)12 ssDNA (b) showing disappearance of free ssDNA accompanied
by band smearing (bracket) and less distinct bands representing complex
formation (denoted by *). (c,d) Measured weight-average molar mass
(Mw) from three independent CG-MALS experiments
as a function of composition. The data was fit assuming 2 or 4 equiv
sites on each ssDNA for the TDP43RRM1 protein. Measured
molar mass data for all three experiments (blue circles) are shown
along with the best fit (blue line), alternative nonfitting model
(green line), and “no interaction” reference curve (dashed
gray). The best fit for the (TG)6 interaction includes
two equivalent binding sites with Kd =
10.4 ± 3.2 μM; the best fit for the (GT)12 interaction
includes four equivalent binding sites with Kd = 1.34 ± 0.12 μM (average and standard deviation
from three replicates; Table 1). (e,f) Concentration of each complex formed, as determined
by the best fit of the CG-MALS data. The fraction of unbound protein
and ssDNA has been left off for clarity. CELF1RRM1–2 and (UGUU)4 ssRNA
interactions
by EMSA (a) and CG-MALS (b). (a) EMSA of CELF1RRM1–2 and (UGUU)4 ssRNA showing disappearance of free ssRNA
accompanied by shifted bands representing complex formation (denoted
by *). (b) Mw measured by CG-MALS (blue
circles) as a function of composition for three experiments, each
with a maximum CELFRRM1–2 concentration of 7–8.5
μM and a maximum concentration of (UGUU)4 of 9–20
μM. The best fit (blue line) considering two nonequivalent binding
sites (Table 1) is
shown by the blue line. An alternative binding model considering two
equivalent binding sites, each with Kd = 3.6 μM, is indicated by the green line. The “no interaction”
reference curve (gray dashed line) is shown for reference. CELF1RRM1–2 and (GU)22 ssRNA
interactions
by EMSA (a) and CG-MALS data and simulations (b,c). (a) EMSA of CELF1RRM1–2 and (GU)22 ssRNA showing disappearance
of free ssRNA accompanied by shifted bands representing complex formation
(denoted by *). (b) Measured Mw vs total
[CELF1RRM1–2] and total [(GU)22] for
triplicate CG-MALS experiments. The best fit (blue line) consists
of complexes with 1:1, 2:1, and 4:1 stoichiometry. Including only
1:1 and 2:1 interaction (green line) is not sufficient to capture
the measured molar mass. The “no interaction” reference
curve (gray dashed line) is shown for reference. c, Calculated concentration of each complex formed across the CG-MALS
heteroassociation gradient. The concentration of unbound monomer has
been left off for clarity.