Introduction Multivalent interactions occur universally in biological systems. Many homotypic and heterotypic protein–protein interactions and protein–nucleic acid interactions utilize multivalency to facilitate cooperativity and achieve cellular signaling (e.g., refs (−)). For example, many RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) such as TDP-43 assemble in multiples upon UG-rich elements of various length, and alterations in the stoichiometric ratios between the protein and its RNA target may have significant consequences regarding normal cellular function. However, current methods still present challenges in providing robust quantitative estimates of the molecular stoichiometry. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), a widely used technique in protein–nucleic acid studies, require optimization of gel conditions to generate distinct bands. Even with optimized conditions, the number of bands is not formally indicative of the correct stoichiometry. Other biophysical techniques, such as fluorescence anisotropy, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), surface plasmon resonance (SPR), or biolayer interferometry (BLI), are indirect methods (i.e., based on changes in fluorescence, enthalpy heat, or “response units” with complex formation). They are generally best suited for quantifying interactions with a 1:1 stoichiometry and can suffer from artifacts for more complex interactions. For example, ITC may not readily distinguish between 1:1 and 2:2 stoichiometric ratios of molecular complexes. In contrast, multiangle static light scattering (MALS) measurements provide a label-free method of directly accessing the molecule’s molar mass, thus directly measuring the essence of complex formation. Composition-gradient multiangle light scattering (CG-MALS) leverages the fact that changes in molar mass can be directly related to the reversible formation and dissociation of specific complexes, each with its own equilibrium association constant. In a typical experiment, each binding partner is prepared in solution at concentrations near the expected equilibrium constant of the interaction. Solutions of varying compositions are prepared automatically, injected into a multiangle light scattering (MALS) detector, and allowed to come to equilibrium inside the MALS flow cell for a user-specified amount of time. The weight-average molar mass (Mw) of the solution is a first-principles calculation based on the light scattering intensity and total concentration of the solution—either specified manually or measured using an inline concentration detector. Association of one species with itself or with a binding partner results in a concentration-dependent increase in Mw; thus, multivalent complex formation is readily evident. The measured Mw as a function of composition is fitted to the appropriate expressions describing the equilibrium association of the analytes, which can include both self-interaction (e.g., dimerization) and heteroassociation. Like AUC or ITC, all interactions occur in solution without the need for immobilization or labeling. CG-MALS can be used to measure interactions with the equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) from ∼100 pM to several mM and has been used to quantify a wide variety of biomolecular interactions, including the self-association of insulin, antibody–antigen interactions, and multivalent interactions with complex stoichiometries. The measured stoichiometry and affinity by CG-MALS agree well with other techniques, including SPR, BLI, AUC, ITC, and CryoEM. Although often applied to measuring interactions under dilute solution conditions in the absence of molecular crowding or phase separations, as in this study, CG-MALS can also be applied to high-concentration measurements to understand what drives phase separation and other thermodynamic processes. The automated CG-MALS measurements presented in this study can be applied to interactions among one or two binding partners and can accommodate any combination of self-association and heteroassociation. To explore the utilization of CG-MALS for the analysis of protein–nucleic acid multivalent interactions, we characterized interactions between two proteins and their nucleic acid partners: TDP43RRM1 with (TG)6 and (GT)12 ssDNA and CELF1 with GU-rich elements (GRE) made up of (UGUU)4 and (GU)22 repeats. For each interaction, CG-MALS data were collected in a three-part experiment, as shown in Figure S1: (1) measurement of the protein alone at 3–5 concentrations, (2) measurement of 8–11 mixtures of protein and oligonucleotide at varying concentrations and stoichiometric ratios to assess, and (3) measurement of the oligonucleotide at 3–5 concentrations. Three technical replicates were performed for each interaction. The change in Mw as a function of composition was then fit to an appropriate equilibrium association model to determine the single set of stoichiometries and corresponding equilibrium association constants (Ka) that fit the data. We show that our CG-MALS data is consistent with some of the quantitative binding measurements and observations reported elsewhere. Furthermore, even without detailed data analysis and model fitting, CG-MALS can provide minimum estimates of stoichiometry based on the maximum measured weight-average molar mass (Mw,max) and the molar composition of the protein and nucleic acid components where Mw,max occurs. Complete fitting of CG-MALS data can provide not only quantitation of the complexes formed but also the equilibrium association constant for the formation of each complex and the individual affinity at each binding site (equilibrium dissociation constant, Kd).