Discussion CSCs have been isolated and established from human tumors and are the driving forces of tumor recurrence and metastasis. Targeting CSC self-renewal or stemness was known as an effective cancer therapy. Previous reports have shown that combined inhibition of BRD4 and RAC1 suppresses growth, stemness, and tumorigenesis by disrupting the c-MYC/G9a/FTH1axis. In this study, we examined the biological function of targeting BRD4 using siRNA, inhibitor, and degrader on breast CSCs. We showed that the siRNA for BRD4, a specific inhibitor of BET family proteins (JQ1), and BRD4 protein degrader (ARV-825) suppress mammosphere formation, ALDH1 activity, CD44+/CD24− subpopulation, CSC growth, and specific survival factor of CSCs. The expression level of CSC BRD4 is higher than that in BCs (Figs. 1 and 2). BRD4 participates in breast CSC formation and the tumorigenic activity of MC38 derived from tumors (Figs. 1 and 9). BRD4 can regulate PD-L1 expression in TNBC. We examined the biological function of PD-L1 by targeting PD-L1 using siRNA, BRD4 inhibitors (JQ1 and ARV-825), and PD-L1 degrader (verteporfin) on breast CSCs. We found that siRNA for PD-L1, a specific inhibitor of BET family proteins (JQ1), and BRD4 protein degrader (ARV-825) suppress mammosphere formation. BRD4 inhibition reduced the expression levels of the membrane, cytoskeleton, and nuclear fraction (Fig. 3). For the first time, we showed that nuclear PD-L1 regulated mammosphere formation. PD-L1 or B7-H1 is well known for its role in immune checkpoint regulation as membrane function. Nuclear PD-L1 of cancer cells regulated the sister chromatid cohesion of BC and was independent of its function in the immune checkpoint. Nuclear PD-L1 regulated gene expressions of NF-κB signaling (BIRC3, RelB, and TRAP1), MHC class I (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-H), and immune checkpoint (PD-L2, VISTA, and B&-H3). NF-κB signaling is essential for breast CSC formation. We checked whether verteporfin (a PD-L1 degrader) can downregulate the transcript and protein levels of RelB. Verteporfin downregulated the transcript and protein levels of RelB (Fig. 4). The siRNA and inhibitor of RelB (calcitriol) suppressed mammosphere formation, and for the first time, we showed that RelB regulated mammosphere formation. The RelB/RelA (p65) complex promotes the transcript of the NF-kB target gene and IL-6 gene of ER-negative BC. RelB interacts with RelA (p65), and the RelB/RelA (p65) complex binds the promoter sequence of the IL-6 gene (Fig. 6). A new finding is that the RelB protein regulates breast CSC formation through IL-6 regulation. Our results indicated that RelB may be a potential target of BC therapy. Recently, studies on cytokine-modulated tumor microenvironments and BCSCs have focused on the mechanisms of chemoresistance. IL-6 in the tumor microenvironment can regulate the self-renewal and survival of breast CSCs. Our data showed that the inhibitors of BRD4/PD-L1/RelB/p65 reduced the levels of secretory IL-6 in breast CSCs (Figs. 6 and 7). The combinational therapeutic strategy of targeting breast CSCs and neutralizing IL-6 may be a good chance to enhance the survival of patients with BC. Our experiment showed that BRD4/PD-L1/RelB/IL-6 axis regulated breast CSCs formation and it was confirmed by the rescue experiments using the PD-L1 overexpression plasmid (Fig. 6F). Our experiment showed that the inhibition of the PD-L1 pathway results in anti-CSC and antitumor conditions. We used MC38 colorectal cancer cells and 4T1 breast cancer cells, which are sensitive to PD-L1 monotherapy and express PDL-1 and IL-6. We examined the relationship between PD-L1 and CSC formation on MC38 colorectal cancer, MC38-derived tumor, and 4T1-derived tumor using THF, a natural compound of BRD4 inhibitor. CSCs from MC38 colorectal cancer and MC38-derived tumors showed that THF inhibited CSC formation and induced apoptosis of MC38-derived CSCs through the c-Myc/BRD4/PD-L1/RelB/IL6 axis (Fig. 8). THF reduced the MC38-derived and 4T1-derived tumor volume and weight, and the inhibitor-treated tumor showed reduced expression levels of c-Myc, PD-L1, and RelB. The strategy of targeting BC and breast CSCs using a natural BRD4 inhibitor may help promote the survival of patients with BC. PD-L1 on MC38 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells and 4T1 breast cancer cells is sufficient to suppress antitumor immunity through tumor immune evasion or correlates with an inflamed tumor microenvironment and inhibits CD8 T-cell cytotoxicity. To evaluate the significance of PD-L1 and BRD4 inhibitor on tumors, we used a mouse tumor model sensitive to PD-1 blockade. To examine the in vivo treatment effect of THF, we checked the levels of CD3 + CD4 + and CD3 + CD8 + T-cells in TIL and TDLNs. THF increased the levels of CD3 + CD4 + and CD3 + CD8 + T-cells in TIL and TDLNs. ICB (anti-PD-L1) and BRD4 inhibitor THF showed a similar anticancer effect.