Materials and methods Parasites cell culture  Leishmania major Friedlin strain (MHOM/IL/81/FN) promastigotes were cultured in SDM (Schneider’s Drosophila Medium) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 5mg/mL HEMIN at 25°C. Parasites were passaged to fresh culture media biweekly (every 3-4 days) to maintain logarithmic growth. Extraction and fractionation of L. major-derived vesicles Methods used to extract L. major extracellular vesicles and perform their fractionation were adapted from Kowal et al. and as previously described by our lab. Modifications to methodology published Kowal et al. were made to account for protozoan rather than mammalian cell culture and relevant centrifugation speeds for Leishmania. Briefly, 800 mL of late log phase (Day 7-9) parasite culture was centrifuged and pelleted at 300 x g (RCF). Parasites were resuspended and washed three times with PBS before being centrifuged and pelleted at 300 x g (RCF) after each washing. The resulting pellet was resuspended in FBS-free RPMI 1640 medium without phenol-red (Life Technologies) at a concentration of 1–4 × 108 parasites/mL, then incubated at 37°C with low agitation (40-60 RPM) in a shaking incubator for 4 hours. Following incubation, the culture was centrifuged at 300 x g (RCF) for 5 minutes to pellet parasites and separate the supernatant from cells. Next, the vesicle-enriched supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 2,000 x g (RCF) for 10 minutes. The resulting pellet (2K) was collected and resuspended in exosome buffer (137 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes pH 7.5), while the supernatant was collected for subsequent centrifugation. Finally, the supernatant was transferred to open-top thin wall polypropylene tubes (16 x 102 mm) and centrifuged at 10,000 x g (RCF) for 30 minutes at 4˚C using a Beckman Coulter Optima XPN-90™ ultracentrifuge and a swing rotor (SW32.Ti). The resulting pellet (10K) was collected and resuspended in an exosome buffer. The remaining supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 x g (RCF) for 1 hour at 4°C, and the resulting pellet (100K) was resuspended in approximately 250 µL of exosome buffer. All samples were stored at -80°C until further analysis. Protein concentrations of the fractionated samples were determined with a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific; catalog number: 23235). Extraction and fractionation of EV populations was performed in biological triplicates, with each replicate originating from a distinct culture of L. major from experimental procedures performed on different days. All downstream assays were performed on each of the three biological replicates. Nanoparticle tracking analysis  L. major-derived vesicle preparations (2K, 10K, and 100K fractions) were analyzed by NTA using an LM-10 NanoSight machine in the laboratory of Dr. Janus Rak at the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre. For the determination of particle size and concentration, three sequential 30-second videos were acquired for each of the 3 biological replicates per fraction, using the default settings of the instrument. Exosome buffer was used as the negative control. Transmission electron microscopy For negative staining, vesicle preparations (2K, 10K, and 100K fractions) from each biological replicate were coated directly on Formvar/Carbon grids, fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 min, and stained with 1% uranyl acetate for 1 min. Formvar grids covered with isolated vesicles were visualized in the FEI Tecnai 12 120 kV transmission electron microscope. Images were taken with the AMT XR-80C CCD Camera System (Facility for Electron Microscopy Research, McGill University). LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis Proteins from the 2K, 10K, and 100K fractions of L. major-derived vesicles from each biological replicate were precipitated with 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and acetone before being digested with trypsin at a concentration of 2 ng/ml. Protein digests were then resolubilized under agitation for 15 minutes in 10 mL of 0.2% formic acid, and desalting/cleanup was performed using C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resolubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 mL of 2% ACN/1% formic acid. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM, University of Montreal). The column was installed on the Easy-LLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) and coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Bioinformatic analysis LC-MS/MS data sets were searched with Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science) against the NCBI Leishmania major database (ID: 5664) and UNIPROT Leishmania major database (ID: LEIMA). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used and was set to an allowance of up to 2 missed cleavages. Biological triplicates of separately analyzed sets of MS/MS data were used to calculate the peptide count values using Scaffold Software, and normalized in-software using TIC area values. Scaffold Software analyzed mascot output files, and hits for further analyses were considered as a minimum of 2 peptides, a peptide threshold of 80%, and a protein identity of 95%. Quantitative analysis of protein expression was performed with Scaffold software using ANOVA for statistical analysis. Differential expression was defined by protein expression levels that were at least 2 standard deviations from the mean expression value derived from all LC-MS/MS samples and a p value inferior to 0.05. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of identified proteins were obtained using PANTHER database (https://www.panther-db.org). Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks of the identified proteins were generated using String database (https://www.string-db.org) with the highest confidence of interaction (>0.900), showing only connected proteins and using an MCL inflation parameter of 3. Heat maps were generated using GraphPad Prism, plotting Z score expression values as per . All-atom scale exosome representation Software and methods used to reconstruct the all-atom scale exosome were carried out as previously described with some modifications. Briefly, a lipid bilayer sample was used to coat an isosphere built using Blender version 3.3.0 (https://www.blender.org/). The size of the isosphere was such as to accurately generate a lipid bilayer with an outer diameter of 100 nm (Figure 6). Human exosome markers were selected using previous references. Protein databank accessions were: 1KPP (TSG101), 1ZOA (GTPase), 2OER (ALIX), 2QGO (hsp90) and 3HS3 (hsp70). All leishmanial structures shown were predicted using the Alphafold software (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/), as atomic structures for leishmanial exosome markers have not yet been determined 11/22/2023 1:54:00 AMa. Full all-atom scale render and sphere size validation were performed using PyMol version 2.5.4 (https://pymol.org/). Additional layers were rendered in Photoshop version 24.7.0. Statistical analysis Statistical analyses of proteomic data were performed using uncorrected ANOVA for multiple comparisons, and p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The data sets were analyzed using GraphPad Prism® software, MS Excel®, and Scaffold® (Version 5.1.0).