Total cell, polymorphonuclear neutrophil, and macrophage counts in BAL from rat pups exposed to hyperoxia and treated or not with rolipram. BAL fluid was collected on day 6 of life from rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia from birth and either treated with rolipram (n = 6/group) or receiving the diluent alone (littermate controls, n = 6/group). Total and differential cell counts were performed as described in Materials and Methods. Data are expressed as mean±sem. * Significantly different from the air-diluent group; † significantly different from the air-rolipram group; ‡ significant difference between oxygen-diluent and oxygen-rolipram groups. Concentration of selected chemokine (MCP1) and cytokines (IL-6 and OPN) in BAL of rat pups exposed to hyperoxia and treated or not with rolipram. Concentrations of MCP-1, IL-6, and OPN were measured by multiplex ELISA in BAL fluid, collected at day 6 of life from rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia from birth and either treated with rolipram (n = 4 or 5/group) or receiving the diluent alone (littermate controls, n = 4 or 5/group). Data are expressed as mean±sem. * Significantly different from the air-diluent group; †significantly different from the air-rolipram group; ‡ significant difference between oxygen-diluent and oxygen-rolipram groups. Steady-state mRNA levels of selected chemokine (MCP1) and cytokines (IL-6 and OPN) in whole lungs of rat pups exposed to hyperoxia treated with rolipram. Relative concentrations of MCP-1, IL-6, and OPN mRNAs were determined by real-time RT-PCR in whole lungs collected on day 6 of life from rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia from birth and either treated with rolipram (n = 4 or 5/group) or receiving the diluent alone (littermate controls, n = 4 or 5/group). Data are expressed as mean±sem. * Significantly different from the air-diluent group;†significantly different from the air-rolipram group; ‡ significant difference between oxygen-diluent and oxygen-rolipram groups. PDE4 activity in whole lung homogenates of rat pups exposed to hyperoxia and treated or not with rolipram. Rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia from birth and treated with rolipram, (n = 5/group), and their littermate controls treated with diluent alone (n = 6/group) were killed on day 6 of life. Whole lungs were dissected out and homogenized as described in Materials and Methods, and cAMP-PDE activity was measured in the absence or the presence of 10 µM rolipram. Data are expressed as mean±sem. † Significantly different from the air-rolipram group; ‡ significant difference between oxygen-diluent and oxygen-rolipram groups. Upper insert: Western blot of PDE4 proteins in whole lung of rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia from birth, and either treated with rolipram (+) or receiving the diluent alone (−); pups were killed on day 6 of life. Aliquots of lung homogenates with equivalent protein amount were subjected to 8% SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with specific anti-PDE4A, PDE4B or PDE4D antibodies. This immunoblot is representative of 3 separate experiments with two different animals/group/experiment, 6 different animals/group. A loading control was performed with a specific anti-beta actin antibody. Survival of rat pups exposed to hyperoxia and treated or not with rolipram. Kaplan-Meier curve representation of survival of rat pups exposed to normoxia (room air) or hyperoxia (Fi O2>95%) (circles and triangles, respectively), and either treated with rolipram (n = 12/group, open symbols) or receiving the diluent alone (littermate controls, n = 13/group, closed symbols).* Significantly different from air-diluent group curve, logrank test, p = 0.017. Growth of rat pups exposed to hyperoxia and treated or not with rolipram. Growth curves of rat pups exposed to normoxia or hyperoxia (circles and triangles, respectively), and either treated with rolipram (open symbols) or receiving the diluent alone (littermate controls, closed symbols). Values are mean±sem. Sixteen to 21 rat pups were included on day 0. * Significantly different from air-diluent group; † significantly different from air-rolipram group. Note that except for day 1 and day 2, all values of rolipram-treated pups were significantly lower than those of oxygen-diluent-treated pups. Lung histological appearance showing effects of hyperoxia and rolipram on airspace formation in rat pups. Rat pups were placed under normoxia (room air, A, B) or hyperoxia (Fi O2>95%, C, D) from day 0 to day 10 while receiving rolipram (B, D) or diluent (A, C). After fixation at constant pressure, lungs were embedded in paraffin, and 3 µm thick tissue slices were cut throughout the entire lung samples and stained with hematoxylin, phloxine and safran. Photographs of the alveolar region, taken at the same magnification, are presented for each treatment group (bar in C represents 50 µm). Rat pup lungs under hyperoxia exhibited a diffuse, simplified lung structure with enlarged airspaces and fewer secondary septa. Rolipram did not prevent this effect.