Introduction Despite recent major advances in perinatal care, very premature infants remain prone to bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), a chronic lung disease. BPD is mainly related to an arrest of lung development, characterized by minimal capillary development and fewer enlarged alveoli. Treatments to prevent or alleviate BPD are limited, and no currently available therapy addresses unequivocally these unmet medical needs. New therapeutic strategies are therefore necessary to maintain harmonious alveolar development and prevent BPD. Alveolarization and distal pulmonary vascular development are intricate events that are affected by a number of insults, including prenatal or postnatal infections, inspired oxygen fraction, and mechanical ventilation. A final common pathway for many of these insults is initiation and persistence of inflammation in immature lungs. Increased concentrations of cytokines and leukemoid reaction have been detected in amniotic fluid and tracheal aspirate from newborns who subsequently developed BPD. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils invade airspaces within hours after birth and persist during the first weeks of life in the airways of these infants. Animal studies have demonstrated that neutrophil-induced airway inflammation promotes an arrest of alveolarization, and that inhibiting the neutrophil influx preserves alveolar development in hyperoxia-exposed newborn rats, an experimental model of BPD. Elevated cAMP level suppresses the activity of immune, inflammatory, and epithelial lung cells and inhibits airway remodeling. cAMP is metabolized by cyclic nucleotides phosphodiesterases (PDEs). Among the eleven families of PDEs, the PDE4 family represents the major cAMP-metabolizing enzymes in all immunocompetent cells. PDE4 inhibitors are active in a broad spectrum of pulmonary inflammation models and are considered as novel anti-inflammatory drugs in lung disorders. We therefore hypothesized that inhibition of PDE4 could prevent inflammation and hence the subsequent alveolarization impairement, and potentially oxygen-induced mortality. We used the hyperoxia model of BPD to test this hypothesis. We investigated the effect of the PDE4 selective inhibitor rolipram on airway inflammation, mortality rate, weight gain, and the extent of alveolarization assessed by morphometric methods. Inflammation was evaluated on day 6, a time when inflammation is important in this model, and assessed by differential cell count and cytokines levels in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and lung tissue. Alveolarization occurs between day 4 and day 14 in rat, and so is better evaluated in the second week of life. Due to very high mortality rate in our model, we chose to study it no later than day 10. This issue has already been explored recently by de Visser and colleagues who found that PDE4 inhibitor therapy prolonged median survival of hyperoxia-exposed pups, reduced alveolar fibrin deposition, lung inflammation as evaluated by albumin content in BAL and macrophage count in histological studies. However, possible direct effect of PDE4 inhibition on alveolar development was not evaluated in this study since no data were provided for pups treated with rolipram under room air. The present study confirms partly their data, but indicates that PDE4 inhibition presents, of its own, inhibiting effects on alveolarization.