References Control mechanisms of lung alveolar development and their disorders in bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Chronic lung disease after premature birth. Contribution of inflammation to lung injury and development. Amniotic fluid cytokines (interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 beta, and interleukin-8) and the risk for the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Relationship between neonatal leukemoid reaction and bronchopulmonary dysplasia in low-birth-weight infants: a cross-sectional study. Outcome of extremely low birth weight infants with leukemoid reaction. Elastase and alpha 1-proteinase inhibitor activity in tracheal aspirates during respiratory distress syndrome. Role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Anti-neutrophil chemokine preserves alveolar development in hyperoxia-exposed newborn rats. Phosphodiesterase isozymes: molecular targets for novel antiasthma agents. Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases: molecular regulation to clinical use. An update and appraisal of the cilomilast Phase III clinical development programme for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors in the treatment of inflammatory lung disease. The postnatal growth of the rat lung. I. Morphometry. Phosphodiesterase 4 inhibition attenuates pulmonary inflammation in neonatal lung injury. Upregulation of phosphodiesterase-4 in the lung of allergic rats. Nitric oxide donor restores lung growth factor and receptor expression in hyperoxia-exposed rat pups. Lung inflammation in hyperoxia can be prevented by antichemokine treatment in newborn rats. Pentoxifylline reduces fibrin deposition and prolongs survival in neonatal hyperoxic lung injury. Pentoxifylline does not protect against hyperoxic lung injury in rats. 4-(3-Cyclopentyloxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-2-pyrrolidone (ZK 62711): a potent inhibitor of adenosine cyclic 3′,5′-monophosphate phosphodiesterases in homogenates and tissue slices from rat brain. Effects of selective phosphodiesterase inhibitors on the polymorphonuclear leukocyte respiratory burst. Influence of selective phosphodiesterase inhibitors on human neutrophil functions and levels of cAMP and Cai. Hypoxic and hyperoxic effect on blood phosphodiesterase activity in young and old rats. Characterization of the rolipram-sensitive, cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterases: identification and differential expression of immunologically distinct forms in the rat brain. Phosphodiesterase 4B2 is the predominant phosphodiesterase species and undergoes differential regulation of gene expression in human monocytes and neutrophils. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia-oxidative stress and antioxidants. Gene expression profile and histopathology of experimental bronchopulmonary dysplasia induced by prolonged oxidative stress. Antimacrophage chemokine treatment prevents neutrophil and macrophage influx in hyperoxia-exposed newborn rat lung. Induction of the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase PDE4B is essential for LPS-activated TNF-alpha responses. Role of osteopontin in cellular signaling and toxicant injury. Gene expression profiling in lung fibroblasts reveals new players in alveolarization. Up-regulation and profibrotic role of osteopontin in human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Are phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors just more theophylline? Inhibitors of phosphodiesterase IV (PDE IV) increase acid secretion in rabbit isolated gastric glands: correlation between function and interaction with a high-affinity rolipram binding site. The toxicity of repeated exposures to rolipram, a type IV phosphodiesterase inhibitor, in rats. Investigation of the molecular mechanisms preceding PDE4 inhibitor-induced vasculopathy in rats: tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, a potential predictive biomarker. Impaired growth and fertility of cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4D-deficient mice. Caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity. Long-term effects of caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity. Postnatal development of alveoli. Regulation and evidence for a critical period in rats. Rapid onset of gene expression in lung, supportive of formation of alveolar septa, induced by refeeding mice after calorie restriction. Characterization of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases of rat tissues. PDE4 inhibition prevents preterm delivery induced by an intrauterine inflammation. Interleukin-1beta induces phosphodiesterase 4B2 expression in human myometrial cells through a prostaglandin E2- and cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate-dependent pathway. The human cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE-46 (HSPDE4A4B) expressed in transfected COS7 cells occurs as both particulate and cytosolic species that exhibit distinct kinetics of inhibition by the antidepressant rolipram. Effect of intratracheal adenoviral vector administration on lung development in newborn rats. Morphometric methods. The radial alveolar count method of Emery and Mithal: a reappraisal 2–intrauterine and early postnatal lung growth. The radial alveolar count method of Emery and Mithal: a reappraisal 1–postnatal lung growth. The postnatal development and growth of the human lung. I. Morphometry.