DISCUSSION The role of proteins interacting with VRK proteins can be of three main types: either substrates of the kinase reaction whose interaction is likely to be transient or regulatory proteins that either introduce covalent modifications or alternatively are able to form stable complexes by a protein-protein interaction, which might affect the enzymatic activity or specificity of VRK1. In this work we identified Ran as a negative regulator of VRK1 activity. The activation of kinases by small GTPases is a well known mechanism of which activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) by Ras is probably the best known process. In the inverse situation, the regulation of kinase activity by interaction with a small GTPase is a little characterized effect; the only case identified is the activation of PAK1 activity by Cdc42. Ran has been shown to be an activator of Aurora A; thus small GTPase-kinase interactions can function as a switch of signaling pathways that play a role in different biological processes that need to be coordinated. However, there are no data regarding inhibition of kinase activities by their interaction with any small GTPase protein. The identification of a stable interaction between VRK proteins and the Ran GTPase opens up new possibilities from a regulatory point of view. The VRK1 protein is very stable and, in continuously growing cells, is always present at relatively high levels; because of that it has been associated with cell proliferation. But this kinase, which can regulate several transcription factors, may not always be necessary, and therefore it is likely to be regulated either spatially or temporally. The inhibition of VRK1 kinase activity by RanGDP suggests that its kinase activity might be regulated in time and space, a role already known for Ran in other functions such as in the localization to the nuclear pore during interphase of Mad1p and Mad2p, two spindle assembly checkpoint proteins. In general only one conformation of Ran has the effect on the target protein, and it is possible that the inhibition of VRK1 activity by RanGDP might be necessary for its nuclear import. The identification of a protein, Ran, that is able to modulate the kinase activity of a nuclear protein, VRK1, has functional consequences. This interaction implies that within the nuclei regions, where these two proteins interact, the kinase activity is inhibited when Ran is bound to GDP. Although in those areas where there is an interaction with the GTP-bound form the kinase is active. Thus although there is a homogeneous distribution of VRK1 protein in the nucleus, it does not imply a similar distribution of its kinase activity. This functional heterogeneity is an important concept regarding the function of both proteins. The VRK1 protein is also present in the cytosol of some cell types where Ran is in its inactive conformation; thus in cytosol, the activity of VRK1 is likely to be inhibited. The different compositions of protein complexes that implicate regulation of VRK1 activity are summarized in a diagram (Fig. 9), and their relative proportions in different subcellular location will determine the local effect of VRK1. In the cytosol, the interaction between Ran and VRK2 is more likely to play a relevant role, but the processes implicated still need to be identified and characterized. VRK2 modulates stress response to hypoxia or to IL-1β signal. Phosphorylation of histones by VRK1 was initially identified for histone H2B. Later the unique Drosophila melanogaster ortholog of this human kinase family, the NHK-1 (nucleosomal histone kinase), has also been shown to phosphorylate histones and is essential for chromosome condensation and mitotic progression. Histone H3 plays an important role in chromatin condensation once the DNA synthesis has been completed. Histone H3 can be phosphorylated by VRK1 in Thr-3 and Ser-10. H3 phosphorylation in Thr-3 has been shown to be required early in mitosis and was concentrated in the central region of the metaphase plate; but the kinase was not known although some studies have detected this activity. H3 phosphorylation in Ser-10 has been detected in mitogen-stimulated fibroblasts and is indispensable for cell transformation, which is also required for proper chromosome condensation and segregation. The subcellular location of H3 phosphorylated in Ser-10 has been detected concentrated in the periphery of chromosome packages in anaphase and telophase and reforming nuclei, thus presenting a different temporal and spatial pattern with respect to Thr-3 phosphorylation. VRK1 phosphorylation of H3 in both Thr-3 and Ser-10 contributes to nuclear condensation and might also be acting as a downstream target of other signaling kinases that have been shown to phosphorylate H3 in in vivo systems, such as MSK, or haspin. H3 phosphorylation in Ser-10 by MSK1/2 has been implicated in the activation of immediate-early response genes, a role that has also been identified for VRK13; and in this context, VRK1 might be an alternative kinase to the Pim1 kinase role in transcriptional complexes containing Myc. The effect of Ran on the activity of VRK1 indicates that within the nucleus and depending on the concentration of each protein they might have different roles creating a functional heterogeneity. VRK1 is located dispersed throughout nuclei, but Ran activation is dependent on the differential gradient of RCC1. This differential activity can have an important role in the regulation of its transcription factors by phosphorylation that includes p53, ATF2, c-Jun, and probably others that will be identified in the future. An alternative role of this inhibition of the phosphorylation by Ran might allow checking for the correctness of DNA replication. The formation of a complex with VRK1-Ran and non-phosphorylated RCC1 suggests that this complex is likely to be in a conformation that binds to chromatin rather than being implicated in nuclear transport that requires phosphorylation of RCC1. The importance of intracellular phosphorylation gradients is exemplified by the role of Aurora B in anaphase where there is a cross-talk between Aurora B activation and microtubules. Although VRK1 does not appear to affect the nucleotide-bound state of Ran, it will be necessary to determine whether it modulates some of the effects associated with Ran, such as nuclear transport. Therefore the interaction between VRK proteins and Ran might have additional effects. The interaction region is conserved among the three VRK proteins and is shared with other small GTPase-binding proteins, making feasible the formation of different combinations depending on intracellular location. In summary, in this report we have shown that Ran GTPase, depending on its activation state, is able to regulate the kinase activity of the VRK1 and thus has the potential to generate areas within the cell with different kinase activity. This represents the first regulatory protein of VRK1 and one of the first nuclear kinases regulated by protein-protein interactions.