Discussion In the present study, we report that inhibition of PDE4s by rolipram in rat pups exposed to hyperoxia improved survival, decreased lung inflammation as assessed by inflammatory cell count in airspaces and cytokine measurement, but did not prevent hyperoxia-induced impairment of alveolarization. Most importantly, we evidence that rolipram presented by itself deleterious effects in normoxia, including decreased weight gain and defective alveolarization, which had not yet been reported. Similar to our previous study, we studied inflammation at day 6 and alveolarization and mortality at day 10. The choice of day 6 for assessing inflammation is based on the demonstration by Deng et al.  that inflammation, as evaluated by accumulation of inflammatory cells in BAL, begins rapidly after initiating hyperoxic exposure and increases with the duration of exposure with a marked significant increase at day 6. Therefore, choosing this stage allowed accurate evaluation of inflammation and its inhibition to be performed at a time when mortality was not yet extensive. Because on the one hand alveolar septation occurs between day 4 and day 14 in the rat pup, and is therefore already patent on day 10, and on the other hand mortality became excessive beyond day 10, this stage was chosen to evaluate mortality rate and perform lung morphometric analysis. Prolonged survival of rat pups under hyperoxia has previously been described with pentoxyfiline (PTX), a nonselective inhibitor of PDEs, and more recently with rolipram at a concentration lower than that used herein, as well as with an other PDE4 selective inhibitor, piclamilast. By contrast, PTX treatment did not prolong survival in adult rats after exposure to 95% oxygen. This may be explained by the difference in tolerance to oxygen between neonatal and adult animals. Rolipram is the prototypal PDE4 selective inhibitor, first described more than three decades ago, and it is generally admitted that at the dosage used in this study, rolipram has minimal inhibitory effect on other PDE families and does not interfere with unrelated signalling pathways. A new generation of selective PDE4 inhibitors that includes piclamilast has been developed, with progress mainly in pharmacokinetics, albeit they reproduce with constancy the previously described in vitro and in vivo effects of rolipram. Thereby, results observed with PTX or piclamilast are certainly related to the capacity of these molecules to inhibit PDE4s. It should be pointed out that de Visser et al. reported, as the result of a pilot experiment, a mortality rate of 33% for pups under hyperoxia and treated with rolipram 0.5 mg/kg/d, whereas we observed decreased mortality under hyperoxia with this dose. The choice of the latter in the present study is based on our preliminary observations that pups in room air presented high mortality rate with higher doses of rolipram, whereas minimal systemic PDE4 inhibition was achieved at doses below 0.5 mg/kg/d. Strain differences in susceptibility to oxygen and rolipram as well as those in initial weight may account for differences in findings between investigations. We indeed observed that rolipram-induced mortality was higher in thinnest pups. Since in the previous investigation, pups were about 2 grams lighter than those in our study on day 1, this represents a likely explanation of the different mortality rates between them. The precise mechanisms by which PDE4 inhibition confers protection against lethal hyperoxia are still unclear. The role of PDE4s in the response to hyperoxia has been poorly studied. It has been demonstrated that hyperoxia, as well as hypoxia, increased blood level of PDEs especially in young rats, but this was not correlated to mortality. We found a tendency towards higher PDE4 activity levels after hyperoxia for 6 days in lung tissue homogenates, and reported an increase of a 72 kDa PDE4B protein, presumably PDE4B2. PDE4A and PDE4D isoforms were not modified by hyperoxia. Because PDE4 activity is high and PDE4B2 is constitutively expressed in neutrophils, this may be related to the lung influx and sequestration of neutrophils induced by hyperoxia in the first week of life. PDE4 has been implicated in the adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells, their chemotaxis, and the production of oxidative burst. In this view, the fact that we documented here a significant decrease in neutrophil count in BAL from rolipram-treated pups associated with a significant decrease of PDE4 activity suggests a specific role for PDE4 in oxygen toxicity. Oxygen insult drives a chronic inflammation involving free radicals, arachidonic acid metabolites, cytokines, chemokines, and recruitment and activation of neutrophils with a further production of reactive substances that react rapidly with proteins, carbohydrates and lipids, thus disrupting intercellular and intracellular homeostasis. The drastic decrease of neutrophil sequestration in airspaces consecutive to rolipram treatment may thus account for its advantage for survival. Although we did not address directly the question of oxidative stress, we determined the protein level in BAL and mRNA level in tissue of the key pro-inflammatory chemokine and cytokine MCP-1 and IL-6 to document airway inflammation. These two mediators have been shown to be elevated during hyperoxia, and neutralization of MCP-1 alleviated lung oxidant injury. Rolipram treatment decreased significantly the accumulation of these proteins in BAL, although it did not diminish the increase of their mRNAs. This latter finding is discrepant with the study by de Visser and collaborators who showed significant decrease of MCP-1 and IL-6 mRNAs on day 10 of exposure. Differences in timing of PDE4 inhibition between their and our experiments may explain this difference. The fact that these mediators were affected by rolipram only at the protein level might reflect the contribution of neutrophils and rapid turnover of these proteins with absence of accumulation in lungs. Indeed, several investigations demonstrated though a significant PDE4-inhibition effect at the transcriptional level in leukocytes, whereas alveolar epithelial cells concomitantly expressed cytokine mRNAs that may be poorly controlled by PDE4s in these cells. In addition, we also determined OPN at pre- and post translational levels and showed a significant effect of rolipram on both. OPN, a secreted phosphoprotein, exists both as an immobilized ECM molecule in mineralized tissues and as a cytokine that mediates cellular functions involved in inflammation and ECM remodelling. OPN gene expression is low during secondary septation, a key event of alveolarization, increases afterwards, and is overexpressed during neonatal hyperoxia and in pulmonary fibrosis, the latter being a feature encountered to variable extent in BPD. Thus, PDE4 inhibition exhibits a potent anti-inflammatory effect in early postnatal period, which is consistent with other models of inflammation in the adult and with clinical trials. Considering the role of inflammation in the development of BPD, we therefore expected a preventive effect of rolipram on hyperoxia-induced lung injury, including its effects on alveolar development. Consistent with previous experiments using the same approach, alveolarization was impaired by hyperoxia, including a significant decrease in alveolar-surface area and RAC. This was the case, however, for diluent-treated as well as for rolipram-treated pups, indicating that rolipram did not restore alveolar surface area and RAC to control values. In their former study, de Visser and coworkers argued for a beneficial effect of PDE4 inhibitors on lung histopathology because they found decreases in septal thickness and alveolar edema despite an absence of effect of PDE4 inhibitors on changes induced by hyperoxia in mean linear intercept. However, our more in-depth morphometric study together with the study of direct effects or rolipram in pups maintained in room air lead to modulate this interpretation. Indeed, rolipram also induced by itself a decrease of absolute alveolar-surface area and RAC in pups maintained in air. This appears suggestive of altered lung development, although this conclusion must be moderated by the observation that all specific values, i.e. when reported to body weight, were increased. Nonetheless, defective alveolarization induced by hyperoxia was not further impaired by rolipram. Neither area and volume densities, nor absolute values and RAC were significantly diminished in rolipram-treated pups under hyperoxia as compared with hyperoxia alone. It is likely that if there were pups presenting more extensively altered alveolarization, they could not survive further and were thus not evaluated. A major gross side effect that was encountered with rolipram treatment was a significant decrease of weight gain, which is probably responsible for at least a part of altered alveolarization. Whereas pups maintained under hyperoxia showed a significant reduction of body weight gain after 5 days only as compared with those in normoxia, rolipram reduced weight gain already from the first day of injection, and its effect encompassed that of hyperoxia. This effect of rolipram was also observed, although to a lesser extent, by de Visser et al.  with half the dose used herein, even though they did not report data from a group treated with rolipram in room air. Our data allow us to conclude unequivocally to a significant effect of PDE4 inhibition independent of oxygen exposure. Rolipram may have an adverse effects on food intake most likely because of its adverse effects in the central nervous system and parietal glands that account for nausea, vomiting, and enhanced gastric acid secretion. However, conversely to the previous study, we did observe pups nursing properly and gastric milk filling during the whole course of rolipram treatment (data not shown). Toxicological reports during preclinical studies of PDE4 inhibitors demonstrated significant inflammation of the intestinal tract and mesenteric vascularitis that suggest ill-absorption of food. Clinical studies with rolipram did not report weight loss in adult patients, the main adverse effects being headache, nausea, dizziness, abdominal pain, and vomiting, but it should be emphasized that the effects of PDE4 inhibitors are unknown on an unborn child, a pregnant woman, or a nursing infant. PDE4D knock-out mice, but not PDE4B or PDE4A knock-out strains, present growth retardation during their first weeks of life, catching up later in adulthood. A clinical trial evaluating the effect of caffeine, which has nonselective PDE inhibitory properties and is widely used in neonatal intensive care units for preventing apnea of prematurity, induced a significant weight gain reduction in these infants, although the difference was no longer present at two years of life. Taken together, these observations suggest that PDE4 inhibitors may indeed interfere with statural growth in the early days of life. In fact, impaired weight gain in rolipram-exposed pups seems to be the major factor accounting for our lung morphometric results. Massaro et al.  previously described a decrease in lung volume and absolute alveolar surface area with increased specific values in undernourished pups. The importance of nutrition in alveolar formation is known even in adult mice, and the rapid onset of genes involved in alveolar formation following refeeding after caloric restriction has been highlighted recently. Therefore, it is difficult to dissociate the effect of rolipram on alveolarization from its weight-gain altering effect, although the decrease of RAC that directly reflects deficient alveolar septation argues for an additional effect independent from that on overall growth. To conclude, PDE4 inhibition by rolipram displayed a potent inhibiting effect on hyperoxia-induced lung inflammation and mortality, but the direct inhibiting effects of the molecule on rat pup growth and lung development do not allow one to conclude favourably about its possible protective effect towards impaired lung alveolarization. Due to this side effects, it is certainly too early to propose a therapeutic role of PDE4 inhibition in the prevention of altered lung development. Nevertheless, the model of altered lung development used here is extremely aggressive, and the part of oxidant injury and inflammatory response cannot really be distinguished. Therefore, studying PDE4 inhibition in other models of arrested alveolarization, more purely inflammatory, as well as the use of a local instead of a systemic route should be considered. Moreover, the possible involvement of PDE4s in lung development is completely unknown and requires specific studies.