Figures and Table Interactions of PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37 with FVIIa catalytic site after implicit-solvent energy minimization (Left) and explicit-solvent molecular dynamics (Right) The hydrogen bonds are shown in purple dashed lines. The FVIIa residues forming hydrogen bonds with PAR2 Arg36-Ser37 are shown and labeled. The figures are generated in InsightII (Accelrys) and edited in Inkscape (www.inkscape.org). The structure of FVIIa protease domain complexed with PAR2 ectodomain (residues 1 to 71) after energy minimization (A), 4-ns implicit solvent molecular dynamics simulation (B), and 54-ns explicit solvent molecular dynamics simulation (C) The FVIIa protease domain is shown in secondary structure or blue surface, and the PAR2 extracellular tail as an orange ribbon. Five PAR2 residues are shown in either CPK or ball-and-stick: Met1, Asn30-NAG (glycosylated Asn30), Arg36, Ser37, and Gly71. The calcium in the FVIIa protease domain is shown as a ball but it is never approached by the PAR2 tail. In (A) the FVIIa residues forming hydrogen bonds with PAR2’s Arg36 and Ser37 are shown in thin ball-and-stick together with disulfides. In both (A) and (B) the complex structure is taken from the last snapshot of the simulation, while in (C) the complex structure is averaged over the last 18 ns of the simulation. The figures are generated in InsightII (Accelrys) and edited in Inkscape (www.inkscape.org). RMSD of FVIIa protease domain (Top) and PAR2 ectodomain (Bottom) as a function of simulation time in explicit solvent molecular dynamics The four vertical lines mark four events in the simulation: (1) the constraint on FVIIa (except the rigid residues) and PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37 is removed at 11 ns, (2) the atomic charges of the Gly71 carboxyl group are changed to zeros at 15 ns to mimic, (3) the atomic charge of the Cl− ion is changed to zero at 19 ns, (4) the system is raised from 300 K to 310 K at 33 ns. Electrostatic interactions between PAR2 and FVIIa protease domain Top: Distances between selected charged residues of PAR2 and FVIIa as a function of simulation time in explicit-solvent molecular dynamics. Bottom: Complex structure averaged over the last 18 ns of simulation. The FVIIa protease domain is shown as secondary structure while the PAR2 extracellular tail as an orange ribbon. All charged PAR2 residues (in ball-and-stick) are shown and labeled in orange; the charged FVIIa residues within 5 Angstrom of the PAR2 charged residues are shown and labeled in green. There are three residue pairs of electrostatic interactions between PAR2 and FVIIa: Arg31—Asp170g (inside blue dashed ellipse), Arg36—Asp189 (not visible but in Figure 1), and Glu56—Arg62 (inside red dashed ellipse). The figure on top is plotted in Python using the matplotlib module (matplotlib.sourceforge.net); the figure on bottom is generated in InsightII (Accelrys) and edited in Inkscape (www.inkscape.org). Partial residue map of FVIIa protease domain complexed with PAR2 ectodomain The structure is averaged over the final 18 ns of explicit solvent molecular dynamics, and hydrogens are not shown for simplicity. FVIIa is shown as a molecular surface built by MSMS and colored by DG colors (carbon atoms in white, charged nitrogen and oxygen in saturated blue and red, uncharged nitrogen and oxygen in pale blue and pink, and hydrogens colored the same as the atoms to which they are bonded). PAR2 is shown as secondary structure representation in orange. The PAR2 residues Arg31-Asp43, Val53, and Glu56 are shown in ball-and-stick with Arg36 and Ile39 in a thicker model. Labeled residues include (1) all residues involving inter-molecular electrostatic interactions or hydrogen bonds except those FVIIa residues that interact with PAR2 Arg36 and Ser37 (see their positions in Figure 1); (2) the key residues that form the binding pocket for PAR2; (3) the FVIIa residues that form a mini binding pocket for PAR2’s Ile39. The labels on FVIIa residues are in either black or white and use the one-letter residue code. The labels on the PAR2 residues are orange and have use the 3 letter code. The figure is generated in PMV (mgltools.scripps.edu) and edited in Inkscape (www.inkscape.org). Effects of antibodies 12C7 and 12D10 on TF-FVIIa signaling through PAR2 (Left) and FX activation (Middle). Signaling of the VIIa mutant Arg62Glu/Arg84Glu was determined with the same methodology (Right). Interactions of PAR2 with FVIIa residues in the epitopes of antibodies 12C7 and 12D10. FVIIa and PAR2 shown as in figure 4. The epitope residues are rendered in stick, and the PAR2 residues Glu56 and Arg36 are rendered in ball-and-stick. Time plot (Left) and structures (Right) showing distance between PAR2’s Arg36 and Gly71 in the explicit-solvent MD simulation. The distance is measured between the alpha-carbons of Arg36 and Gly71. The average distance in the last 18 ns is 33±5 A. The four vertical lines in the plot mark the four events in the simulation (see Figure 3 for details). FVIIa is shown in blue secondary structure and PAR2 extracellular tail in red ribbon. The solid red ribbon represents the PAR2 tail structure averaged over the last 18 ns of the simulation, while the lined red ribbons represent 3 consecutive average structures along the 18 ns. The model shows that the two ends of the PAR2 tail are relatively flexible, but the conformation of the carboxyl aspect of the PAR2 ectodomain maintains a compact, well defined structure. The structure figure is generated in InsightII (accelrys.com).