Proteomics identification of Ran as an interaction partner of VRK2B. A, experimental design. GST-VRK proteins or GST protein was transfected in HEK293T cells, and the protein complexes were isolated by glutathione-Sepharose pulldowns. The proteins were separated in parallel by 2D SDS-PAGE. Spots from the gels of GST-VRK1 and GST-VRK2B were selected for analysis when they did not appear in the GST control gel. The spots were subjected to trypsin digestion and analysis by MALDI-TOF. B, pulldown of proteins associated to GST-VRK2B. HEK293T cells were transfected with 8 μg of plasmid pCEFL-GST-VRK2B or 2 μg of pCEFL-GST as control, and the correct expression of the proteins was analyzed by Western blotting 48 h after transfection (left). The lysates were mixed with glutathione-Sepharose beads. Protein complexes were isolated by pulldown and subjected to 2D SDS-PAGE. Each sample was resolved in a pH range of 3–10, and the second dimension electrophoresis was performed on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels. A spot selected for further analysis is shown in the figure (right); it was later identified as Ran. IB, immunoblot. C, mass spectrum of the tryptic peptides of the selected spot (left). Mass value (m/z) and putative amino acid position assignments are indicated above peaks. Assignments were made using Mascot software. m/z value, position, and sequence of each assigned peptide are shown (right). Abs. Int., absolute intensity. D, peptide coverage map of Ran GTPase; the peptides used for identification are underlined and bold. Interaction of the three VRK proteins with Ran. Pulldown with GST-Ran of transfected human VRK1 (A), VRK2B (B), VRK2A (C), and VRK3 (D) is shown. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids pCEFL-HA-VRK1 (5 μg), pCEFL-HA-VRK2B (5 μg), pCEFL-HA-VRK2A (8 μg), or pCEFL-HA-VRK3 (5 μg) expressing the corresponding human proteins. The protein expression was checked in the cell lysate prepared 48 h after transfection. Cell extracts were mixed with 10 μg of bacterially expressed and purified GST-Ran, its mutant T24N (inactive) and L43E (active) forms, and GST as negative control. The mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with gentle rotation after which they were used for a pulldown using glutathione-Sepharose beads, and the proteins were detected in immunoblots (IB) with a specific antibody for the HA epitope present in the VRK proteins or anti-GST to detect whether the pulldowns contained equal amounts of proteins. E, dependence of the interaction on the concentration of VRK1. Incubations were carried out using a fixed concentration of GST-Ran (80 nm) and increasing concentrations (as indicated) of VRK1-His purified proteins in MgCl2 binding buffer as indicated under “Experimental Procedures.” The mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C and used for a pulldown with Sepharose beads. The proteins present in the pulldown were detected in an immunoblot that was developed using antibodies specific for GST and VRK1. F, in vitro binding of VRK1-His to GST-Ran wild type (wt), GST-RanL43E, and GST-RanT24N with the addition of GTP, GDP, or EDTA. Incubations were carried out using 0.07 μm VRK1-His and 2 μm GST-Ran purified proteins loaded with 2 mm GDP, GTP, or EDTA in MgCl2 buffer. A Western blot of the pulldown was developed using antibodies to GST and VRK1. Binding of endogenous VRK1 with GST-Ran or endogenous Ran with GST-VRK1. A, interaction of endogenous VRK1 and exogenous Ran proteins. The level of endogenous VRK1 in the HEK293T used for a pulldown is shown in the gel at the top. The extract was used for a pulldown with either purified GST-Ran (left) or GST as negative control (right). The proteins were detected with antibodies as indicated under “Experimental Procedures.” B, interaction of endogenous VRK1 with different forms of Ran indicated in the legend (top) and used for a pulldown assay. HEK293T cells (6 × 107) were lysed, and the expression of endogenous VRK1 was checked with the 1F6 monoclonal specific antibody for human VRK1 (top gel). The lysate was incubated with 10 μg of GST-Ran or GST purified proteins 4–12 h at 4 °C and centrifuged, and the beads were analyzed in an immunoblot (IB) with specific antibodies to VRK1 and GST (bottom gel). C, interaction of endogenous Ran with transfected VRK1. The endogenous proteins Ran and RCC1 in the cell lysate are shown at the top. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids pCEFL-GST-VRK1 (10 μg) and pCEFL-GST (2 μg), and their correct expression was checked in the cell lysate prepared 48 h after transfection. The lysate was mixed with glutathione-Sepharose beads for 4–12 h at 4 °C, and the beads were pulled down by centrifugation. The proteins brought down with the beads were analyzed in an immunoblot with specific antibodies (lower blot). D, RCC1 does not bind directly to VRK1. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids pCEFL-GST-VRK1 (5 μg), pCEFL-GST (1 μg), and pGFP-RCC1 (2 μg) in the combinations indicated in the figure, and their correct expression was checked in the cell lysate prepared 48 h after transfection. The expression of endogenous Ran and RCC1 was also checked (top panel). The lysate was mixed with glutathione-Sepharose beads for 4–12 h at 4 °C, and the beads were pulled down by centrifugation. The proteins brought down with the beads were analyzed in an immunoblot with specific antibodies (bottom panel). Subcellular localization of endogenous VRK1 and Ran proteins and detection of their interaction by reciprocal immunoprecipitations. A, confocal immunofluorescence microscopy of endogenous VRK1 and Ran proteins in HEK293T cells. VRK1 was detected with the VE1 polyclonal antibody, and as secondary antibody a Cy3-labeled anti-rabbit antibody was used. Ran was detected with a monoclonal antibody, and as secondary antibody a Cy2-labeled anti-mouse antibody was used. B, colocalization of endogenous Ran and VRK1 in cells that have completed division. C, HEK293T cells (2 × 108) were lysed, and the extracts were subjected to immunoblot analysis to check the expression of endogenous Ran and VRK1 (top panel) with specific antibodies. Half of the extracts were used to perform an immunoprecipitation (IP) of endogenous Ran with the specific monoclonal antibody and a control immunoprecipitation with a nonspecific monoclonal antibody (αAU5) (left panel). The other half of the extracts was used to immunoprecipitate endogenous VRK1 with a mixture of two specific polyclonal antibodies (VE1 and VC1) and to perform a control immunoprecipitation with a nonspecific polyclonal antibody (αFLAG) (right panel). The immunoprecipitations were subjected to immunoblot (IB) analysis. VRK1 was detected in the Ran immunoprecipitation but not in the negative control, and Ran was detected in the VRK1 immunoprecipitation but not in the negative control. D, as a positive control, the same conditions that were used to detect the interaction of VRK1 with immunoprecipitated Ran were used to see the interaction of RCC1 with immunoprecipitated Ran. E, colocalization of endogenous Ran and VRK2 in HEK293T cells. VRK2 protein was detected with a rabbit polyclonal antibody. Ran was detected as described above. DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. Mapping the VRK1 region that interacts with Ran. A, mapping the interaction between GST-Ran and VRK1. HEK293T cells were transfected with constructs expressing the full-length VRK1 (plasmid pCEFL-VRK1-HA), amino-terminal region 1–332 (pcDNA-VRK1-N-myc), carboxyl-terminal region 267–396 (pEGFP-C-VRK1), or the kinase-dead VRK1 (pCDNA-VRK1-K179E-myc). The lysates were incubated with 10 μg of GST-Ran purified protein and centrifuged, and the proteins in the pulldown were identified with a specific polyclonal antibody for VRK1 (lower panel). The expression of the proteins was determined by Western blot (top panel). B, diagram illustrating the common region between the different VRK1 constructs and identifying the region of VRK1 needed for interaction with Ran. C, pulldown of endogenous Ran with different constructs of human VRK2. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids pCEFL-GST, pCEFL-GST-VRK2N (1–320), pCEFL-GST-VRK2A-C1 (256–508), pCEFL-GST-VRK2A-C2 (364–508), and pCEFL-GST-VRK2B-C (256–397) expressing different regions of human VRK2. In the pulldown proteins the presence of endogenous Ran was determined with a specific antibody. D, diagram illustrating the common region between the different VRK2 constructs and identifying the region of VRK2 needed for interaction with Ran. E, interaction of RanL43E with VRK1. The experiment was performed as in A. F, partial competition of VRK3 with VRK1 for binding to Ran. The mixture of proteins in the concentrations indicated in the figure was used for a pulldown of His-VRK1, and the bound proteins were determined by immunoblot (IB). wt, wild type. RCC1 can facilitate the interaction of Ran with VRK1. A, VRK1 does not interact directly with RCC1. Incubations were carried out with bacterially expressed and purified proteins using 2 μm GST-VRK1, GST-Ran wild type (wt), or GST and 0.07 μm RCC1-His in MgCl2 buffer. A Western blot of the pulldown was developed using specific antibodies against GST and RCC1. B, RCC1 increases the interaction between VRK1 and Ran in a dose-dependent manner. In this experiment equimolar amounts of Ran and VRK1 were used. Proteins were detected in the pulldown with specific antibodies as indicated under “Experimental Procedures.” IB, immunoblot. Ran inhibition of VRK proteins autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of histone H3. A, in vitro kinase assay of VRK1 autophosphorylation and H3 phosphorylation in the presence of three forms of Ran, Ran wild type (wt), RanT24N, and RanL43E (in the presence of GTP). B, autophosphorylation of VRK1 and phosphorylation of H3 by VRK1 was dose-dependent and was inhibited by Ran also in a dose-dependent manner. C, phosphorylation of histone H3 by endogenous VRK1 was inhibited by Ran. VRK1 was immunoprecipitated from HEK293T cell extracts under normal growing conditions (lanes 2 and 3) or from mitotic HEK293T cell extracts (M; lanes 4 and 5). The immunoprecipitated VRK1 was used to perform a kinase assay using as substrate recombinant H3 in the presence (lanes 3 and 5) or absence (lanes 2 and 4) of 4 μg of purified GST-Ran wild type. As a control, an immunoprecipitation (IP) with a nonspecific antibody (αHA) was performed (lane 1). D, identification of the residues phosphorylated by VRK1 on histone H3. Specific phosphorylation of H3 in Thr-3 (p-H3 T3) and Ser-10 (p-H3 S10) by VRK1 was inhibited by Ran. The phosphorylated residues were identified with phosphospecific antibodies for each residue. At the top are shown the proteins present in the in vitro kinase assay. At the bottom is shown the result of the analysis with phosphospecific antibodies. E, effect of VRK2A (left) or VRK2B (right) on autophosphorylation of VRK2 protein and histone 3 phosphorylation. F, in vitro kinase activity assay of VRK3 in the presence of different forms of Ran protein. The kinase was tested in VRK3 autophosphorylation and histone H3 phosphorylation assays. IB, immunoblot. Effect of VRK1 on the nucleotide exchange activity of Ran. A, effect of VRK1 on the release of GDP bound to Ran. Ran (50 pmol) was preloaded with [3H]GDP followed by incubation with the specified amounts of RCC1 for 5 min and 2 mm GTP without VRK1 or with different amounts of VRK1. B, effect of VRK1 on Ran loading with GTP by RCC1. Ran (50 pmol) preloaded with unlabeled GDP was incubated with 35S-GTP for the specified time without RCC1, with 250 fmol of RCC1 or 500 fmol of RCC1, and with or without the addition of VRK1. The mean value of three experiments with their standard deviation are shown in both parts. Model of different complexes that affect the kinase activity of VRK1. Based on the components of the protein complex the kinase activity of VRK1 is modulated. The kinase activity is inhibited when it is bound to RanGDP. The VRK1 kinase activity is recovered if it is free, or bound to Ran in its active conformation (RanGTP), or to Ran activated by RCC1. In mitosis the nuclear membrane (dashed line) is disintegrated. Act., active; Inact., inactive; T3-P, phosphorylated Thr-3; S10-P, phosphorylated Ser-10.