Materials and Methods Details are available as as supporting information; see Materials and Methods S1. Animals and hyperoxic exposure All animal procedures were approved by our Institutional Committee on Animal Use and Care. Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Saint-Germain sur l'Arbresle, France). Rat pups born in the laboratory and their dams were placed in chambers (Charles River) run in parallel under FiO2either>95% or  = 21% (room air) as previously reported, from day 0 to day 6 or 10. The dams were exchanged daily between O2-exposed and room air-exposed litters to avoid lethal oxygen toxicity. Rat pups were weighed every day. Rolipram treatment Rat pups received daily either an intraperitoneal injection of 0.5 mg/kg/d of rolipram (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MI) or its vehicle (ethanol 0.05%), hereafter referred to as the diluent. The dose of 0.5 mg/kg/d was chosen after performing a pilot study with i.p. doses of rolipram ranging from 0.2 to 3 mg/kg/d, which showed high mortality at the highest doses and minimal systemic PDE4 inhibition at the lowest doses. This dose is twice the one used in previous study in which high mortality rate was reported for 0.5 mg/k/d. Sample collection and bronchoalveolar lavage Rat pups were killed by an intraperitoneal overdose of sodium pentobarbital (70 mg/kg, Ceva, Libourne, France) and were bled by aortic transsection. Lungs were either immediately lavaged, or fixed for morphometric/morphologic analysis, or dropped in liquid nitrogen and kept frozen at −80°C for further RNA extraction or protein immunoassay. BAL was performed using a total of 4 ml sterile saline; BAL fluid was centrifuged and total and differential cell counts were performed. Chemokine/Cytokine measurements in BAL Measurements of MCP-1, IL-6, and osteopontin (OPN) protein concentrations were performed using the Searchlight™ multiplex sample testing by Endogen, PerbioScience (Brebieres, France). Determination of mRNA steady-state level in lung tissue Total RNA was extracted using Trizol™ reagent (Invitrogen, Cergy-Pontoise, France). First-strand cDNAs were synthesized from 2 µg of RNA using the Superscript II reverse transcriptase, and random hexamer primers (Invitrogen). Real-time PCR was conducted using sequence-specific primers and “18S rRNA” as a reference with aid of ABI PRISM® 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Courtaboeuf, France). Phosphodiesterase activity and western blot analysis Whole lung tissues were homogenized in hypotonic buffer. PDE activity was assayed using a modification of the Thompson and Appleman's method as described previously. For western blotting of PDE4, samples were boiled in Laemmli buffer, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotted with polyclonal rabbit anti-PDE4A (AC55), polyclonal PDE4B (K118) and monoclonal PDE4D (M3S1) antibodies as previously described. Correction for variations in loading was performed by blotting with an antibody raised against beta-actin (Sigma, A2066). Membranes were incubated in chemiluminescent detection reagent (ECL, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Velizy, France), then exposed to KODAK BioMax MS film. Other sets of antibodies were used for additional controls: sheep polyclonal antibodies raised against PDE4A, PDE4B, and PDE4D and gave identical results. Morphometry analysis Lungs were fixed at constant pressure as described previously. Alveolar surface density (Svap) was determined using point counting and mean linear intercept methods described by Weibel and Cruz-Orive. Absolute surface area (Sa) per lung was calculated by multiplying surface density by lung volume. Radial alveolar count (RAC) was also performed. Statistical analysis Multiple group comparisons were performed using either ANOVA or Kruskall-Wallis analysis, and two-group comparisons were made by Fishers post hoc test or Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. Survival was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier survival function and the logrank test. Calculations were performed with Statview® software (5.0, SAS Institute Inc, North Carolina). A P value<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.