DISCUSSION The derived PAR2-FVIIa interactions presented here may help in the design of small molecule inhibitors that block the PAR2 cleavage by FVIIa. Comparisons of these interactions with those present in FVIIa’s binding to other substrates can serve to guide the design of inhibitors that would selectively block a particular FVIIa substrate. The key PAR2-FVIIa interactions identified here include electrostatic interactions between stably folded regions of the PAR2 ectodomain and residues within the catalytic cleft. Most of the contacts are consistent with typical docking of substrates to serine protease domains. We find an insertion of PAR2’s P3’ Ile39 into a mini binding pocket formed by FVIIa residues Gln40, Trp141, Gly142, Gln143, Thr151, Lys192, and Gly193. This is somewhat unusual and transition state structures of serpin-serine protease domains typically show binding of P2’ Leu38 into this approximate area. The predicted interactions will require further mutagenesis studies to precisely confirm the energetic contributions of P and P’ interaction, as well as accessory contributions by the somewhat more remote charged residues. The PAR2-FVIIa interaction and the relatively well defined structure of the carboxyl aspect of the PAR2 ectodomain raises an important question, i.e. how the FVIIa protease domain, which is well above cell membrane, approaches the PAR2 ectodomain that is directly anchored in the cell membrane. The distance between the active site of TF-bound FVIIa and the membrane is experimentally measured to be 75±2 A. However, from this simulation study the distance between PAR2’s Arg36 (in the FVIIa catalytic site) and Gly71 (four residues above membrane) is only 33±5 (Figure 8). The large discrepancy between these two distances suggests that the TF-FVIIa complex must be tilted toward the cell membrane, potentially by additional protein interactions in order for the FVIIa protease domain to bind and cleave the PAR2 extracellular tail. Although our antibody inhibition data are consistent with potential interactions of VIIa exosite regions during the initial docking of PAR2, another possibility is that the antibody inhibition of PAR2 activation results from steric interference with the required tilting of the TF-FVIIa complex.