INTRODUCTION Tissue factor (TF) is a membrane-bound cell-surface protein and the primary initiator in the extrinsic pathway of the coagulation cascade (reviewed in References). This pathway starts with TF’s exposure to the blood stream upon vessel damage, binding to its natural ligand the blood-borne factor VII (FVII), and activation of FVII to FVIIa. The TF-FVIIa binary complex activates the factor X (FX) to FXa, which eventually leads to blood clotting and drives downstream signaling by thrombin. Thus, the complex has been well known for its role in the initiation of coagulation. Besides this hemostatic role, the TF-FVIIa complex has also been found in recent years to regulate a broad range of non-hemostatic cellular responses including gene transcription, protein translation, apoptosis, and cytoskeletal reorganization (reviewed in References). These cellular responses in turn affect several cellular processes including inflammation, angiogenesis, and the pathophysiology of cancer and atherosclerosis (reviewed in reference). The TF-FVIIa complex elicits calcium transients in various cell types, and activates the three major MAP kinase family members p42/p44, p38, and JNK. The primary signaling pathway of the TF-FVIIa complex involves activation of protease-activated receptors (PARs). PARs are G-protein-coupled receptors that have seven trans-membrane helices and are activated through proteolytic cleavage of their extracellular N-terminal domains by proteases (reviewed in Reference). The cleaved PAR N-terminus functions as a tethered ligand that folds back into PAR’s binding pocket and activates PAR, which leads to initiation of intracellular signaling cascades (reviewed in Reference). Among the four PARs discovered so far (PAR-1, PAR2, PAR-3, PAR-4), only PAR2 is directly cleaved by the TF-bound FVIIa, but both PAR-1 and PAR2 can be cleaved by FXa (reviewed in Reference). The TF-FVIIa signaling through PAR2 regulates gene transcription and protein translation, cell proliferation and survival, or cell motility and integrin activation (reviewed in Reference). In tumor cells, this signaling pathway regulates pro-angiogenic growth factor expression as well as integrins involving crosstalk with the TF cytoplasmic domain (reviewed in Reference). The importance of TF-FVIIa signaling through PAR2 drives us to investigate how the serine protease domain of FVIIa cleaves the extracellular N-terminal ectodomain of PAR2. Although it is known that a serine protease cleaves PAR2 at the site between Arg36 and Ser37 to yield the tethered ligand SLIGRL, there is no structure or model to demonstrate what PAR2-FVIIa interactions other than those at the catalytic site are required to facilitate the cleavage. Knowing these interactions is essential not only to understand the cleavage mechanism but could also be useful in the development of inhibitors that selectively block this cleavage and the related signaling pathways. For example, to suppress tumor growth, it may be possible to develop a FVIIa inhibitor that selectively prevents PAR2 cleavage while still allowing coagulation initiation. In this study, we perform molecular dynamics simulations and antibody epitope analysis to derive the PAR2-FVIIa interactions. First we built an extended PAR2 extracellular n-terminal polypeptide model with its Arg36 and Ser37 engineered into the catalytic site of FVIIa protease domain. We then simulated the complex of PAR2 and FVIIa protease domain for 4 ns in implicit solvent (to drive initial condensation of the PAR2 ectodomain and its approach to FVIIa) followed by 54 ns in explicit solvent (for simulating binding and sampling equilibrium configurations). The last 18-ns equilibrium simulation of the explicit solvent molecular dynamics has been used for analyzing PAR2-FVIIa interactions. Finally we report the resulting model interactions and an antibody study reporting on interactions distal to the active site.