METHODS 1. Starting Structure The starting structure was built based on the crystal structure (PDB ID: 1DAN) of the TF-FVIIa complex inhibited by a partial-peptide compound Dpn-Phe-Arg-Ch2 (D-Phe-Phe-Arg-chloromethyllketone with chloromethylketone replaced by a methylene group). As the six human PAR2 amino acids at the cleavage site are Lys34-Gly35-Arg36-|-Ser37-Leu38-Ile39 (whole sequence in References), we altered the compound’s Dpn residue to Lys34, mutated Phe to Gly35, kept Arg as Arg36, and changed Ch2 to Ser37. We adjusted the configuration of Ser37 to satisfy the required interactions with the catalytic site of a serine protease (see Figure 11–27 of); the FVIIa catalytic site was monitored through the simulations see – Figure 1). Then we appended the ends of this four-amino acid peptide with the n-terminal Met1 and c-terminal Gly71 peptides respectively (Figure 2(A)). Gly71 is the last residue of PAR2 extracellular ectodomain prior to the first transmembrane helix in our human PAR2 homology model (Zhang Q, Ruf W, & Olson AJ, unpublished). (In the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database, human PAR2 residues 1–75 are marked as extracellular (http://ca.expasy.org/uniprot/P55085); thus residues 72–75 are still extracellular although they are part of the first transmembrane helix.) The PAR2 n-terminal polypeptide was elongated on both sides of the Arg36-Ser37 scissile bond, leaving this area rigid and adjusting certain torsions of adjacent PAR2 polypeptide residues to reduce steric clashes where the chain enters and exits the FVIIa protease active site. FVIIa has four domains: Gla, EGF1, EGF2, and protease. As PAR2 is cleaved by the protease domain and there is no evidence that the PAR2 ectodomain interacts with other FVIIa domains, we removed FVIIa’s Gla, EGF1, and EGF2 domains as well as TF from the TF-FVIIa complex in order to simulate the PAR2-FVIIa complex more efficiently. In the simulations, the FVIIa protease domain residues that interact with TF and FVIIa’s other domains are kept rigid to mimic the bound state. Water molecules that are more than 3 A from the FVIIa protease domain were removed as well as the cacodylate ion that is part of the crystallization buffer. The only ions remaining in the structure are one Ca2+ ion and one Cl− ion. The Ca2+ ion is essential for activation of FVII by TF and is located on the loop from Gly69 to Glu809. The Cl− ion is not documented to be of significance and may come from the CaCl2 solution. We kept this ion at the beginning of the simulation but eventually removed it during explicit-solvent molecular dynamics. PAR2 residue Asn30 is modified by an N-Acetyl-D-Glucosamine (NAG) because glycosylation on this residues regulates human PAR2 expression and/or signaling. The NAG moiety was taken from the crystal structure of endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) complexed with Gla domain of protein C (PC Gla) (PDB ID: 1LQV) in which there are 6 NAG-modified asparagines. The modeling was done in InsightII (Accelrys), and the resulting starting structure is shown in Figure 2(A). 2. Force Field Assignments Simulations were performed in AMBER 9 with the ff99 force field. This force field contains standard amino acids but no NAG-modified asparagines (NAG-Asn). Here we describe the procedure to build the topology and partial charges for NAG-Asn. The topology can be derived from any existing NAG-Asn residue, such as those in the EPCR-PC Gla complex (PDB ID: 1LQV). The partial charges, however, should be derived from all possible conformations of this residue since the conformation of this NAG-Asn30 residue is unknown. The NAG-Asn conformations were generated as combinations of three parts: (1) Asn conformations, (2) Asn-NAG torsions, and (3) NAG torsions. For the first part, AMBER gives two conformations C5 and αR with different torsions. For the second part, we sampled the torsions from the six NAG-Asn residues in the EPCR-PC Gla complex found two conformation classes named as L1 and L2 here. For the third part, the torsions were sampled from the same six NAG-Asn residues and were found to have two conformation classes as well, named as N1 and N2 here. Thus, we sampled a total of eight NAG-Asn conformations. While ideally the Asn-NAG torsions and NAG torsions should be sampled more extensively, the NAG-Asn30 residue was not a critical element of this study. These eight conformations combined were used to compute the NAG-Asn atomic partial charges following the multi-conformational RESP procedure for amino acids. The procedure was partially automated by the R.E.D. II program, but the geometric optimization option or the molecular re-orientation option in the program was not applied. R.E.D. II in this case was used to sequentially execute (i) the Gaussian 03 program to compute the molecular electrostatic potential for each NAG-Asn conformation and then (ii) AMBER’s RESP program to fit the atom-centered partial charges to the grid determined in the previous step. In the second step, molecular equivalences between the eight conformations were applied in addition to the required atomic equivalences among each conformation, thus all the conformations have the same partial charges. The derived NAG-Asn topology and partial charges in the AMBER PREPI file format are provided in the Supporting Information S1. 3. Simulations in Implicit Solvent The starting structure has the PAR2 n-terminal polypeptide in an extended conformation from residue Met1 to the cleavage site and from the cleavage site to residue Gly71 (Figure 2(A)). Simulations of this starting structure in explicit solvent would have been extremely expensive since solvent has to fill a large box that encloses the entire extended complex. Thus, implicit solvent was used at the beginning to allow PAR2 to quickly condense and approach the FVIIa protease domain; then explicit solvent was used to simulate the binding and equilibrium configurations. All simulations were performed using AMBER 9 with the ff99 force field. The Ca2+ ion, which did not interact with PAR2 at any point of the implicit-solvent simulations, was distance-restrained to the oxygen atoms in the Ca2+ coordinated system. The implicit solvent simulation used a Generalized Born model (igb=5) with a distance cutoff of 16 A. It began with a four-step energy minimization: (1) 500 steps of steepest descent (SD) and 500 steps of conjugate gradient (CG) with a positional restraint of 100 kcal/mol/A2 on all heavy atoms including waters in order to equilibrate the hydrogen atoms; (2) 200 SD and 300 CG with a positional restraint of 100 kcal/mol/A2 on heavy atoms of PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37 and FVIIa in order to partially remove steric collisions between PAR2 and FVIIa; (3) 200 SD and 300 CG with a positional restraint of 100 kcal/mol/A2 on heavy atoms of FVIIa only to further remove the steric collisions; (4) 50 SD and 300 CG with a positional restraint of 10 kcal/mol/A2 on heavy atoms of the rigid FVIIa residues. The rigid residues are those in FVIIa protease domain that are within 5 A of TF and other FVIIa domains. These residues do not interact with PAR2, and the restraint keeps the FVIIa protease domain in the form with which it binds to TF and the other FVIIa domains. In the energy minimizations, SHAKE (bond length constraints) was not used. After energy minimization, the molecular dynamics simulation was initiated with a 10 ps equilibration phase to increase the system temperature from 0 to 310 K using Langevin dynamics (ntt=3) with a collision frequency of 5.0/ps. A restraint of 1 kcal/mol/A2 was applied to all residues to keep them stable during heating. The equilibration was followed by 4 ns of production dynamics with a constant 310-K temperature weakly coupled at every 2 ps (ntt=1). A restraint of 1 kcal/mol/A2 was applied to the heavy atoms of PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37 residues, all FVIIa residues, ions, and waters in order to focus the computation on the PAR2 n-terminal peptide folding and approach to FVIIa. Other settings in molecular dynamics included the use of SHAKE (ntc=2; on bonds involving hydrogen), a time step of 2 fs, a salt concentration of 0.15 M, a solvent dielectric constant of 78.5, and the option to carry out GB/SA (generalized Born/surface area) simulation with surface area computed using the LCPO model (gbsa=1). The resulting structure is shown in Figure 2(B). 4. Simulations in Explicit Solvent The explicit solvent simulation was initiated from the last snapshot of the implicit-solvent simulation (Figure 2(B)). This structure was first axis-aligned and then solvated in a TIP3 water box with buffer sizes of 10, 8, and 15 A in the X, Y, and Z directions, respectively (a larger buffer size in Z direction was specified to prevent the solute from approaching the box edges in that direction). The system was neutralized with 44 Na+ and 50 Cl− counter ions, resulting in a physiological ionic strength of 0.15 M given the solvent volume in the water box. The system was then energy minimized without SHAKE in three steps: (1) 500 SD and 5500 CG with a restraint of 100 kcal/mol/A2 on the solute heavy atoms to relax hydrogen atoms; (2) 200 SD and 800 CG with a restraint of 10 kcal/mol/A2 on the solute heavy atoms to further relax hydrogen atoms and allow slight movement of the heavy atoms; (3) 200 SD and 800 CG with no restraint to relax all atoms. The energy minimization was followed by a four-step equilibration with SHAKE and a time step of 2 fs: (1) Heat up – 100,000 steps to increase temperature from 1 to 300 K, coupled at every 0.5 ps, at constant volume with a 10 kcal/mol/A2 restraint on the solute; (2) Constant pressure – 100,000 steps at 300 K, coupled at every 1 ps, with a 5 kcal/mol/A2 restraint on the solute; (3) More constant pressure– 100,000 steps at 300 K, coupled at every 2 ps, with a 3 kcal/mol/A2 restraint on the solute; (4) Final equilibration– 200,000 steps at constant pressure and 300 K, coupled at every 4 ps, with a 3 kcal/mol/A2 restraint on the rigid FVIIa residues. The equilibration was followed by 53-ns of production dynamics (1 to 54 ns) at constant pressure with the use of SHAKE and a time step of 2 fs. In this long simulation, we carefully monitored the stability of the FVIIa catalytic site, the stability of the Ca2+ coordination system, the stability of the crystal Cl− ion, the interactions between PAR2 and FVIIa, and whether the water box was still large enough for the PAR2 ectodomain undergoing conformational changes. This simulation was initiated from the last snapshot of the equilibration phase (at 1 ns) with a restraint of 3 kcal/mol/A2 on the rigid FVIIa residues, FVIIa catalytic site residues, and PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37. The simulation subsequently underwent four parameters-changing events: (1) at 11 ns, the restraint on FVIIa catalytic site and PAR2’s Arg36-Ser37 was removed in order to allow all interacting residues to move freely (the restraint on the rigid FVIIa residues was retained throughout); (2) at 15 ns, the atomic charges of the Gly71 carboxyl group were zeroed out to mimic Gly71 linked to the next amino acid; (3) at 19 ns, the atomic charge of the non-essential crystal Cl− ion was changed to zero to allow it to leave the PAR2-FVIIa interface (which it did); (4) at 33 ns, the system temperature was increased from room temperature of 300 K to a physiological temperature of 310 K. The PAR2-FVIIa complex structure averaged over the last 18 ns (36 to 54) is shown in Figure 2(C). In the explicit solvent simulations, the generalized Born model was not used (igb=0). The particle mesh Ewald method was used to calculate the long-range electrostatic interactions. The non-bonded distance cutoff was reduced to 8 A, and the Ca2+ ion was not distance-restrained to its binding oxygen atoms in case the ion interacted with PAR2. The Ca2+ ion is stable throughout the simulations and was not found to interact with PAR2. The van der Waals parameter for Ca2+ (R=1.3263 A, ε=0.4497 kcal/mol) was derived from Aqvist’s work instead of using the one in AMBER’s default ff99 force field parm99.dat (R=1.7131 A, ε=0.459789 kcal/mol for “C0”). The Aqvist’s parameter has the radius R close to those used in the force fields of CHARMM (1.3670 A) and OPLSAA (1.3537 A). 5. Analysis of Simulations Root mean squared deviations (RMSD), residue distances, and average structures were computed by AMBER’s ptraj program. Hydrogen bonds were computed by the CARNAL program in AMBER 8 (documented in AMBER 7 or earlier versions). Plots of RMSD and residue distances are drawn in Python using the matplotlib module (matplotlib.sourceforge.net). Molecular structures are visualized in either InsightII (Accelrys) or PMV (mgltools.scripps.edu). 6. Antibody Study TF-FVIIa signaling was studied in human umbilical vein endothelial cells that were transduced with adenovirus to express high levels of TF and PAR2. Cells were serum starved for 5 h, before stimulation with 10 nM FVIIa in the presence of 50μg/ml anti-FVII antibody 12D10 or 12C7. TF-FVIIa signaling was quantified by TagMan analysis measuring TR3 nuclear orphan receptor gene induction after 90 minutes of stimulation. For TagMan (Applied biosystems) 2μg total cellular RNA was reversed transcribed using oligo-dT primers (Superscript II reverse transcriptase, Invitrogen). All samples were normalized with human glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). The epitopes of these antibodies have previously been mapped in detail with Ala exchange mutants in the FVIIa protease domain. In control experiments, the inhibitory effect of these antibodies on factor Xa (FXa) generation was confirmed using a parallel reaction, where the cells were incubated in the presence of 100 nM FX. FXa generation was measured using a chromogenic assay, as previously described