Since completion of the human kinome, a new subfamily of serine-threonine kinases, known as vaccinia-related kinases (VRKs),1 has been identified that is composed of three proteins, two of which are catalytically active, VRK1 and VRK2, and are mainly expressed in proliferating cells. These proteins have a conserved kinase domain but differ in their regulatory region with little conservation among them or with any other protein. The VRK1 protein is mostly nuclear, although in some cell types it is also present in the cytosol; this subcellular localization is regulated in response to a specific signal.2 The VRK2 gene codes for two isoforms. The cytosolic VRK2A isoform corresponds to the full length and has 507 amino acids, and its carboxyl-terminal region has a hydrophobic tail and is membrane-bound to the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. The VRK2B isoform is shorter; corresponds to the first 397 amino acids of isoform A, thus lacking the membrane-anchoring region; and has both a cytosolic and nuclear localization; the latter is mainly expressed in cell types in which the VRK1 protein is cytosolic, thus suggesting a functional replacement. Human VRK1 is the best characterized protein; it phosphorylates several transcription factors related with cellular responses to stress such as p53, forming an autoregulatory circuit; c-Jun; and ATF2. VRK1 also phosphorylates Baf, a protein implicated in the assembly of nuclear envelope membranes and in the formation of a functional mitotic spindle. Recently VRK1 has been shown to phosphorylate histone H3 in Thr-3 and Ser-10 residues and is implicated in chromatin condensation. VRK1 expression has been correlated with several proliferation markers in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. VRK1 expression parallels that of c-myc and c-fos and occurs early in the G1 phase. The phenotype induced by inactivation of VRK1 induces defective cell proliferation and eventually cell death, suggesting that VRK1 can participate at some stage in these processes. Cell-specific biological effects are determined by the interplay among signaling pathways in the cells, which are likely to be determined by the proteins expressed, their interactions, and their levels in each cell type, but most intracellular protein-protein interactions remain to be identified. For the identification of these interactions the use of proteomics approaches represents a powerful tool that can identify protein networks as well as placing the proteins within signaling pathways related with different biological processes. Furthermore the characteristics of specific protein-protein interactions can also result in the identification of novel protein motifs that can be used to identify new components of protein networks in the cell. Elucidation of the components of a signaling pathway requires the identification of specific protein-protein interactions, which may be either consecutive steps in the pathway or regulatory elements. The components of the signaling pathway where VRK1 is implicated, or other VRK members, are little known, therefore we decided to search for interacting proteins using a proteomics-based approach. The nuclear Ran GTPase was identified in this study by proteomics analysis as a partner of VRK proteins. The small GTPases are a family of signaling proteins of which the most characterized members are the Ras, Rho, and Rac proteins, all of which are cytosolic and mediate signals that reach mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. There is also a nuclear small GTPase, Ran, that belongs to the Ras superfamily; its partners in the nuclei are mostly unknown except for importin proteins that are implicated in nuclear transport, which is the best well established function of Ran. However, Ran is also implicated in regulation of kinetochore function and formation of a functional mitotic spindle. The active RanGTP is necessary to form membrane vesicles that are precursors required for the assembly of the nuclear envelope. The only guanine exchange factor known for Ran is RCC1. Ran participates in chromosome segregation by its interaction with RCC1. RCC1 generates a local concentration of RanGTP that is necessary for activation of proteins required for kinetochore assembly, spindle formation, or nuclear envelope formation among other mitotic events. Nuclear envelop reformation depends in its early stages on RanGTP. Ran can also activate the mitotic kinase Aurora A. In addition, its GEF, RCC1, is regulated by phosphorylation in mitosis preventing Ran binding to importin and turning it to chromosome binding. In this work the nuclear Ran GTPase was identified as a modulator of VRK activity on itself or on histone H3, an effect that depends on the activation state of Ran. However, VRK1 did not affect the nucleotide-bound state of Ran. Thus, this Ran interaction with VRK proteins might regulate their kinase activity spatially and temporally in the cell, thus contributing to determining different roles depending on its subcellular localization and representing a functional compartmentalization.