(A) Schematic illustration of insulin production following treatment with NA-MWCNTs. Notes: Right panel shows a beta-cell with red fluorescence exhibited by insulin following the proposed treatment (cells were marked with Texas Red®-labeled anti-insulin antibody). (B) MWCNTs used for the experiment. The scale bar represents 50 nm. (C) Ultraviolet visible spectroscopy of raw MWCNTs and NA-MWCNTs. Nanotube solutions give a 295.7 nm absorption band, (red spectrum) nicotinamide solution is characteristic of the 260 nm adsorption band. Abbreviations: NA, nicotinamide; MWCNTs, multiwalled carbon nanotubes; AU, absorbance units Immunofluorescence detection of insulin production in 1.4E7 insulin-producing cells. The 1.4E7 cells were harvested at a density of 2–4 × 104 cells/cm2 on Lab-Tek 4 chamber glass slides and treated with 5 mg/L NA-MWCNTs, NA, MWCNTs and PBS, respectively. Abbreviations: NA, nicotinamide; MWCNTs, multiwalled carbon nanotubes; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; INS, insulin. (A) Flow cytometric quantification of insulin-producing cells following treatment with 5 mg/L NA (i) or NA-MWCNTs (ii) for 30 minutes. (B and C) Quantification of insulin released in culture media following treatment and stimulation with glucose. Statistically significantly increased amount of insulin was found in the NA-MWCNT medium compared with that found in the medium of the cells treated with NA. Abbreviations: NA, nicotinamide; MWCNTs, multiwalled carbon nanotubes; FSC-H, forward scatter. Immunocytochemical localization of MIF and insulin in 1.4E7 insulin-producing cells. Notes: 1.4E7 cells were stained with DAPI, and anti-insulin and anti-MIF antibodies and further analyzed by immunofluorescence (Texas Red® anti-insulin antibody and Alexa Fluor® 488 anti-MIF antibody). Insulin staining is red, MIF staining is green. Fluorescence images were obtained using an Olympus FSX 100 fluorescence inverted microscope (×60). Abbreviations: NA, nicotinamide; MWCNTs, multiwalled carbon nanotubes; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; INS, insulin.