Materials and Methods Ethics Statement All experiments were conducted in compliance with the laws and the regulations of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. In addition, all animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board and conformed to the ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research statement of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.” All surgery was performed while the animals were under ketamine and xylazine anesthesia, and all efforts were made to minimize suffering. This research study was approved by: “THE KING KHALED EYE SPECIALIST HOSPITAL’S HUMAN ETHICS COMMITTEE & INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (HEC/IRB), RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA”. The permit number/approval ID is “RP 0630-P”. Reagents Anti-rat/anti-mouse ZNT-8 polyclonal antibody (RZ8) was purchased from Mellitech (Grenoble cedex- FRANCE). Polyclonal rabbit anti-β-actin antibody was purchased from MBL international (Woburn, MA). Goat anti-rat IgG was purchased from Bethyl Lab (Montgomery, TX) was used as an isotype control antibody for Western Blot studies. Rat anti-Mouse IgG was purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA) was utilized for immunohistochemistry studies. YC-1 was purchased from A.G. Scientific (San Diego, CA) and dissolved in sterile DMSO. Tissue Culture The rat Müller cell line (rMC-1) was kindly provided by Dr. Vijay Sarthy (Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA). Müller cell cultures were grown in DMEM supplemented with 15% FBS, and a fungicide mixture and 0.5% gentamicin, incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2/95% air. Medium was changed every 2 days, and cells were grown to confluence in a 150-mm dish. Cells were split into 60-mm dishes and were used in the experiments when confluent.  In Vitro Hypoxia Inducing hypoxia in vitro was conducted as previously described. Briefly, cells were placed in airtight chambers (BioSpherix, Redfield, NY) and the O2 tension was maintained at 1.2% by using Pro-Ox Model 110 O2 regulator (BioSpherix, Redfield, NY). The chamber was purged with a gas mixture of 5.32% CO2, and 93.48% N2. Quantitative Real-Time RT-PCR Total cellular RNA was isolated using TriZol reagent (Invitrogen). Total RNA (5 µg) was used to generate cDNA with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen); product (3 µl) was amplified with TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) on a StepOne Plus platform (Applied Biosystems). We used the primers summarized in (Fig. 1A) for RT-PCR. Quantitative Real-Rime RT-PCR was conducted, as previously described. Briefly, gene-specific molecular beacons and primers were designed to encompass the genes of interest, with beacon’s annealing site to overlap with the exon-exon junctions for additional specificity (Beacon Designer 6.0, Premier Biosoft International, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Threshold cycle (Ct) values for the different samples were utilized for the calculation of gene expression fold change using the formula 2 to the minus power of delta delta ct. Fold changes in the ZnT8 gene relative to the β-actin endogenous control gene were determined by the following equation: fold change  = 2–Δ (ΔC T ), where change in threshold cycle (ΔC T) = C T (gene of interest) – C T (β-actin) and Δ (ΔC T) = ΔC T (treated) – ΔC T (untreated). Western Blot Cells were seeded overnight in 6-well plates (105 cells/well). Müller cells (rMC-1) were treated with either YC-1 (25–100 µM) or DMSO (0.2% v/v) for 48 hr under normoxic or hypoxic environments. Reactions were terminated by addition of lysis buffer (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA). Western Blot analysis was conducted, as previously described. Briefly, protein content of the cell lysates was determined according to the Bradford method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Aliquots (40 µg) of whole-cell lysates were separated on 7.5% SDS-PAGE, and electro-transferred onto polyvinylidene membranes (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Little Chalfont). After blocking with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS-T, the blots were incubated overnight with anti-(ZnT8, and β-actin {internal control}) antibodies. Negative control experiments consisted of omission of the ZnT8 antibody and utilizing a goat anti-rat IgG (isotype control antibody) as a replacement. Then blots were washed 3 × 10 min washes in PBS/tween and subsequently incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody at 1∶3000. The signals were obtained by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences), and visualized by exposure to X-ray film. Upon completion of chemiluminescence, equal lane loading was checked by Ponceau S Solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). X-ray films were scanned with a computer-assisted densitometer (model G-710; Bio-Rad) to quantify band optical density (Quantity One software; Bio-Rad). Care and Treatment of Mice OIR was induced in litters of C57/BL6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory), as previously described. Retinal neovascularization (NV) was induced in newborn mice as described previously. Briefly, P7 mice were exposed with their nursing mother, for 5 days (between P7 and P12) to hyperoxic conditions, by incubating them in an airtight chamber (PROOX 110 chamber O2 controller; Biospherix Ltd., Redfield, NY) ventilated by a mixture of O2 and air to a final oxygen fraction of 75±2%. These incubation conditions induced vaso-obliteration and subsequent cessation of vascular development in the capillary beds of the central retina. At P12, the mice were allowed to recover in normal room air conditions and maintained for another 5 days (till P17), the day in which peak disease occurs. A condition of relative hypoxia resulted between P12 and P17, and extensive retinal NV developed in 100% of the mice. Age-matched animals with the hyperoxia-exposed groups were maintained identically, except they were exposed to room air (21% O2, 79% N2) for the duration of the experiment. Animals were examined and sacrificed on the same days. Mice were treated in accordance with the recommendations of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO) and all animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). Mice were divided into four groups; (1) Non-treated mice grown under normoxic conditions; (2) non-treated hyperoxia-exposed mice; (3) DMSO- treated hyperoxia-exposed mice; and (4) YC-1-treated hyperoxia-exposed mice. Intravitreal Drug Injections A group of hyperoxia-exposed animals (n = 15) were injected intravitreally (into both eyes) at P12 and P15 with 3 µl of YC-1 (100 µM) (drug-treated group). Another group of hyperoxia-exposed mice (n = 15) were injected intravitreally (into both eyes) at P12 and P15 with 3 µl of DMSO (0.2% {v/v}). Non-treated mice grown under ambient conditions, non-treated hyperoxia-exposed mice, DMSO- treated hyperoxia-exposed mice and YC-1-treated hyperoxia-exposed mice, were all examined at different critical time points for qualitative assessment of the retinal vasculature by fluorescein angiography. Immunohistochemistry Mouse retinas were dissected and prepared for immunohistochemical analysis, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS for 15 min at room temperature and embedded in paraffin, sectioned (5 µm). Tissue sections were deparaffinized, hydrated, and later exposed to heat-induced antigen retrieval using a microwave oven (three 5-min cycles in citrate buffer, pH 6.0), endogenous peroxidase was abolished with methanol, and hydrogen peroxide and nonspecific background staining was blocked by incubating the tissue sections for 5 min in normal swine serum. Subsequently, all slides were washed three times in PBS, and incubated for 1 hr with primary anti–(ZnT-8 and β-actin) antibodies. Negative control experiments consisted of omission of the ZnT8 antibody and utilizing a rat anti-mouse IgG (isotype control antibody) as a replacement. The sections were washed with TBST and incubated with EnVision Polymer HRP secondary antibody (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) for 30 min. All slides were stained with DAB solution and counterstained with hematoxylin. Slides were cover slipped (Permount; Fisher Scientific, Fairlawn, NJ) and examined by light microscopy. Negative controls included omission of the primary antibody or its substitution with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Sections were photographed under a microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 135, Thornwood, NY), and images were acquired a digital camera (AxioCam, NY). All retinas were examined at X60 objective. The staining intensity in our series ranged from a weak blush to moderate or strong. The amount of cells staining with the antibody was further categorized as focal (<10%), patchy (10%–50%), and diffuse/multifocal (>50%). For meaningful semiquantitative analysis, focal and/or weak staining was considered equivocal staining, and patchy or diffuse/multifocal staining was either subcategorized as either moderate or strong staining. All immunohistochemical analyses were measured by Metamorph digital image software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Immunohistochemical Image Analysis ZnT8 positive immunostaining were captured using AxioCam digital microscope camera. MetaMorph image analysis was conducted by setting the filter with excitation wavelengths 488. MetaMorph image analysis software (version 7.1, Universal Imaging, Downingtown, PA) was used for image processing and quantitative analysis of ZnT8 positive immunostaining. MetaMorph tools were used to set the threshold and regions of interest (ROIs). All images were captured at identical time and exposure settings, and they were all processed to the same scale. Images were first segmented on the basis of pixel intensity, which was done on a plane-by-plane basis for an image stack. Briefly, each retinal section was scanned into Metamorph and five (5) fields/slide was chosen from each section for analysis. One hundred and fifty (150) cells from each field were selected. The saved file was used to calibrate each image for specific pixel size. With the help of a free drawing tool, ZnT8-stained areas were chosen and measured in total-pixels area. A threshold encompassing an intensity range of 100–250 gray-scale values was applied to the ROIs in the least brightly stained condition first. The data were also read and investigated by Matlab v6.5 script file software, which counted the total number of pixels that were above threshold value. This number was divided by the total number of pixels in each image to yield percent fluorescent pixels. To correct for background fluorescence, the threshold was adjusted for each experimental series, with concomitantly processed negative controls used as the guide for setting background fluorescence. The background fluorescence intensities per pixel were subtracted from the experimental data by using a one-step erosion procedure, and then all remaining objects were counted. The same threshold was subsequently applied to all images. ZnT8 was considered to be positive only when it exceeded the established threshold. Percent ZnT8 expression above threshold in the total area selected was then calculated. The total ZnT8 fluorescence intensity per cell was calculated, and the average fluorescence intensity per pixel was determined by dividing the total intensity by the area of the cell measured in pixels. This was followed by measuring the average fluorescence intensity in each field. Data from multiple fields as indicated over several experiments were used to obtain the final results. The number of immunopositive-stained cells per image was then expressed per um2, and the average number per section was determined among five separate fields. Statistical Analysis Analysis was performed utilizing ANOVA for multiple variables and with t–Tests for comparison of 2 groups with normal distribution. For the analysis of Real Time RT-PCR data; immunohistochemistry data; Western Blot data, analysis was performed with ANOVA for multiple variables and with t–Tests. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least 3 independent experiments. Significance was defined as *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.