Materials and methods Cell culture A hybrid beta-cell line (1.4E7) formed by electrofusion of human pancreatic islets cells with PANC-1 cells, purchased from the European Collection of Cell Cultures (Salisbury, UK) was used in the experiments. The 1.4E7 cells were grown in 25 cm3 Corning plastic plates in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) (Sigma-Aldrich Co, St. Louis, MO, USA) 1640 culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin until they reached 80% confluence. The cells were maintained in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C, and were routinely passaged by washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA, USA) prior to detachment with 0.25% (w/v) trypsin-EDTA (Invitrogen) and splitting at a 1:3 ratio. All ingredients for the media were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co (Deisenhofen, Germany). Exposures to the different nanomaterials were done on subconfluent cells. Functionalization of carbon nanotubes Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (>98% carbon basis, optical density [OD] × internal diameter [ID] × L 10–15 nm × 2–6 nm × 0.1–10.0 μm; product number 677248) and NA (N0636) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co for the experiments involving covalent functionalization of CNTs. A nonconjugated highly purified MWCNT control solution was prepared as previously described. The product obtained was diluted in physiologic saline solution (NaCl 0.9%) at a ratio of 1:10 (v/v). A 1 M solution of NA was prepared by dissolving 0.122 g of NA per mL of sterile water, providing a 100 × stock solution. In our experiments, the NA was used at a final concentration of 10 mM. Functionalization of MWCNTs with NA was performed as previously described. Briefly, in the first step, MWCNTs were carboxylated by oxidation in a mixture of sulfuric acid and nitric acid (3:1), and the NA molecules were further attached by formation of amide bonds with carboxylic groups using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl-aminopropyl) carbodiimidehydrochloride and N-hydroxysuccinimide, which generated MWCNT complexes functionalized with nicotinamide (NA-MWCNTs). Characterization of MWCNTs The ultrastructural morphology of the MWCNTs was evaluated using a transmission electron microscope (JEM 1010, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) as previously described. The images were captured using a Mega View III camera (Soft Imaging System, Olympus, Münster, Germany). Spectroscopy was performed using an ultraviolet-visible spectrometer (Mini 1240, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Exposure conditions For the experiments, the cells were seeded at a density of 2–4 × 104 cells/cm2 on Nunc® Lab-Tek 4 (Sigma-Aldrich) chamber glass slides (No 177399) or in a six-well plate in complete medium and allowed to attach overnight. After 24 hours of cell attachment, the cells were washed with 0.2 mL per cm2 of PBS. The cells were then exposed to suspensions (10 μL) of the test materials (MWCNTs and MWCNTs-NA, NA), or PBS between 1 μg/mL and 20 μg/mL for 30 minutes, one hour, or 3 hours. All experiments were performed in triplicate for each concentration. Microscopy analysis of cells For the microscopy analysis, we used Lab-Tek chamber slides for in situ observation of the cells adherent to the glass (the walls were removed and the culture medium was discharged). Thus, no cell transfer was needed prior to visualization/staining. After being exposed to different formulations of MWCNTs/NA, the cells were thoroughly washed three times with 1 × PBS, and then fixed with 10% formaldehyde solution for 10 minutes, washed three times with PBS, and immunochemically stained. Cells in culture were explored using an inverted microscope with phase contrast (FSX10, Olympus, Munich, Germany). Fluorescence immunocytochemistry A standard immunocytochemistry protocol was used. The 1.4E7 cells were treated with 1, 5, or 20 μg/mL MWCNTs, NA-MWCNTs, NA, or PBS alone for 30 minutes, one hour, and 3 hours, respectively, and were then fixed with 3%–4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature and ice-cold acetone for 7 minutes, respectively, and subsequently permeabilized with digitonin 0.2% in PBS for 10 minutes. Nonspecific binding of the antibodies was blocked in PBS containing 10% goat serum and 0.3 M glycine. After 30 minutes of incubation, the cells were further incubated with a guinea pig anti-insulin antibody (ab7842, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) diluted to 1:50 in PBS or with a rabbit polyclonal anti-MIF antibody (No 36–7401, Invitrogen) at 4°C for one hour. Next, the cells were washed and then reacted with a goat polyclonal secondary antibody to guinea pig antibody –H&L (TR) (ab6906, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) diluted to 1:100 in PBS or with Alexa Fluor® 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody diluted to 1:1000 at room temperature in the dark for one hour for detection. After being washed with PBS three times for 5 minutes in the dark, the cells were further incubated with DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) for one minute. Image analysis All image analyses were performed using ImageJ version 1.43u (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Quantification of insulin and MIF levels was achieved by applying a linear stretch of the pixel intensity histogram corresponding to each slice in the z-stack in order to increase the image contrast by adjusting the number of low and high intensity pixels. The image was then converted into a z-projection. To remove the spaces between each slice of the z-stack and to create a single image from all slices, the image was further converted into a z-projection. A 7 × 7 top-hat filter was further used followed by a median filter and a threshold step. The thresholded image was then converted to a binary image, which resulted in white structures (insulin/MIF) on a black background that can be analyzed in ImageJ. ELISA quantification of insulin production Quantification of insulin levels in the cell media following treatment was performed using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit for insulin (E90448Hu, USCN Life Science Inc, Houston, TX, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Insulin concentrations in culture supernatant following treatment were measured using a solid phase sandwich ELISA based on two monoclonal antibodies targeting against insulin epitopes. Briefly, after appropriate insulin secretion stimulation, insulin standards and appropriately diluted (1:50) samples were added to an insulin antibody-precoated multiwell microplate. Next, the secondary antibody was supplemented to the well and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. After a repetitive washing step, addition of tetramethylbenzidine chromogen with short incubation (15 minutes in the dark at room temperature) was performed. The reaction was stopped by addition of H2SO3 reagent. Absorbance at 450 nm was read using a MR-9602G microplate reader and concentrations were calculated using the microplate reader (MG-9620G ELISA) software provided by the manufacturer. Glucose stimulation test Following treatment as described the 1.4E7 cells were washed twice with PBS and immersed in 15 mM glucose-containing Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium for 2 hours. The medium was then collected and stored at −20°C for ELISA. The secreted insulin in the 15 mM glucose medium was measured according to the ELISA protocol. Flow cytometric analysis A FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) was used to quantify the number of insulin-producing cells following treatment. Suspensions of treated 1.4E7 cells (NA-MWCNTs/NA/MWCNTs/PBS, respectively) were analyzed by flow cytometry using a red fluorescence (FL3 channel > 670 nm) which was employed to show the population of insulin-producing cells marked with Texas Red® anti-insulin antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The primary and secondary antibodies used were guinea pig anti-insulin antibody (ab7842; Abcam) and goat polyclonal secondary antibody to guinea pig antibody–H&L (TR) (ab6906, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The resulting comparative cytogram was further used to determine the number of insulin-producing cells per mL. All of the parameters were gathered at low speed in logarithmic mode (approximately 15 μL per minute) in order to maintain the counting level under 1,000 events per second. The threshold value for the FSC (forward scatter channel) channel was 52. The population concentration was estimated using CellQuest software programs (quadrant statistics module). Statistical analysis All data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean. Continuous data were tested for normality (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test) before hypothesis testing. Fisher’s exact test was used for qualitative data correlations. For all tests, a 0.05 threshold was selected for statistical significance. Statistical data analysis was performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 17.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA).