Discussion It has been determined that Zn++ dyshomeostasis, both systemically and in the pancreas, plays an intricate role in the pathology of both, T1DM) and T2DM. Severe Zn++ deficiency induces hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia, directly implicating Zn++ in systemic glucose regulation. Consistent with a role for Zn++ in glycemic dysregulation, Zinc supplementation ameliorates some physiological symptoms of DM. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the major causes of blindness world-wide. In this study, we have employed the OIR mouse model for various reasons: 1) This model depicts the human retinopathy of prematurity (ROP); 2) It represents an ischemia-dependent model, which manifests the overexpression of HIF-1, the main causation of retinal ischemia; 3) It manifests retinal vasculopathy, i.e., the development of retinal NV; 4) Ischemia has been implicated in the pathophysiology of age related macular degeneration (AMD). Recent findings strongly suggest that ischemia and vascular impairment play a central role in the etiology of AMD; 5) Most importantly, zinc deficiency is highly associated with retinal pathologies that are induced by retinal ischemia. There is hoarding evidence, which indicate that zinc deficiency in the retina contribute to the pathogenesis of AMD. It has been suggested that replenishing zinc by oral administration had a positive effect on AMD patients by slowing down the progress of the dry form of the disease. These findings support the view that zinc deficiency is involved in the pathogenesis of AMD. The 2004 AREDS report and other studies confirm that replacing zinc with a dietary supplement has beneficial effects against AMD. Therefore, the Zn-AMD connection suggests that the risk for or severity of AMD increases with the depletion of available intracellular zinc pools in the retina.Hypoxia inducible factor members have been implicated in regulating the angiogenic and metabolic response to ischemia. HIF-1α is known to exist in subretinal NV and hypoxia is the main inducer for the production of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). It has been reported that zinc hampers hypoxia-stimulated HIF-1 activation in astrocytes by inhibiting nuclear HIF-1α translocation and subsequently disrupting HIF-1 heterodimerization. Zinc inhibited HIF-1α recruitment onto VEGF promoter and the zinc-induced suppression of HIF-1-dependent activation of VEGF. Of note is the finding that zinc also inhibited HIF-2α other than HIF-1α; this is highly relevant in light of the fact that recent studies have shown that HIF-2α may be the main regulator of long term (chronic) hypoxic gene expression. In order to investigate the molecular and cellular mechanisms that influence the expression of ZnT8 under ischemic conditions; we have utilized the mouse model of OIR. This model has been widely used in studies related to proliferative DR, ROP, and in studies evaluating the efficacy of antiangiogenic compounds. In the retina, hypoxia may occur as a result of vascular disruption caused by various pathologies, such as hyperglycemia in DM, thrombosis in vein occlusions or developmental delays in ROP. Furthermore, hypoxia/ischemia are the key driving force inducing a vascular response, whereby insufficiently perfused tissue is revascularised by the sprouting of new capillaries from pre-existing vessels. However, this revascularization condition is sometimes not successful, leading to the formation of abnormal vessels–so-called ‘neovascularization’. NV is major vision-threatening sequelae in many ischemic retinopathies because of the abnormal vascular leakage, which cause edema and exert tractional forces that untimely cause retinal detachment. It is therefore, tentative to speculate that ischemic vascular disease in the retina may either leave retina permanently ischemic with slow degradation of vision, or alternatively lead to proliferative vascular disease, which can also destroy vision. It has been shown that low concentrations of zinc were neuroprotective in the retina. Is has been demonstrated that the “muffler model” estimated the resting intracellular free Zn++ concentration to be 1.07 nM, whereas excursions above or below that level may have detrimental effects. Ischemia is a crucial component of DR. A plethora of reports have addressed ischemic retinopathy and the role in which ZnT8 play in DM. However, the link between ZnT8 and ischemic retinopathy has not been defined yet. Our current investigation also highlights the neuroprotective effects of YC-1. Previously, we have reported the pleiortropic effects of YC-1 on various hypoxia/ischemia-induced retinal pathologies. These investigations have concluded that YC-1 targets several antiangiogenic properties in the ischemic retina, via various mechanisms, which were mainly centered on the; (1) suppression the HIF-1α protein levels, accumulation, and stability; (2) blocking the HIF-1α nuclear shuttling mechanism; (3) promoting the HIF-1α proteasomal degradation; (4) inhibiting hypoxia-inducible factor-2 α (HIF-2α), VEGF, erythropoietin (EPO), enodthelin-1 (ET-1), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) at the message and the protein levels. Furthermore, our current sequence analysis of ZnT8 indicates the presence of a hypoxia response element (HRE) in the promoter region of ZnT8. Therefore, it is plausible to suggest that HIF-1α (or possibly HIF-2α) overexpression notably suppresses ZnT8 expression, whereas the inhibition of HIF-1α (or possibly HIF-2α) by YC-1 rescues the injured retina by upregulating the ZnT8 levels. It has been demonstrated that levels of platelet-derived growth factor-B (PDGF-B) were increased after ischemic injury. Our studies have previously demonstrated that YC-1 reversed reactive gliosis during ischemic retinal injury via impairing the expression of PDGF-B and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in glial cells. It has been shown that YC-1 had protective effects against sodium nitroprusside-mediated apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle cells. Additionally, it’s been reported that YC-1 protected the white matter axons against damage by ischemia. Studies have indicated that YC-1 was neuroprotective in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line against damage caused by MPP+ or 6-OHDA. Moreover, YC-1 was able to inhibit lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced iNOS, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression, and nuclear factor kappa-b (NFκB) activation, indicating that YC-1 may be developed as an anti-inflammatory neuroprotective agent. Our investigation emphasizes the potential neuroprotective effects of YC-1. It has been demonstrated the antiapoptotic effects of NO are mediated, in part, by cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP) and downstream target protein kinase G (PKG). Furthermore, it has been reported that nitric oxide (NO) serves as neurotransmitter and a neuromodulator in the central and peripheral nervous systems and certain neuronal cells. At low physiological concentrations, NO can act as an antiapoptotic/prosurvival factor in neural cells. It has been revealed that NO-cGMP-PKG signaling pathway was crucially involved in the learning enhancement of YC-1 and appeared to play an essential role in preventing the activation of a proapoptotic pathway, thus promoting neural cell survival. In addition, in rat astrocytes, YC-1 analogs attenuated H2O2-induced effects, and demonstrated their neuroprotective effects against cellular injury in cortical neurons. The neuroprotective properties of these analogs may be useful in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and stroke. However, further studies are necessary to determine the exact mechanism by which YC-1 form confers neuroprotection. In the current study, we show for the first time the expression profile of ZnT8 in the retina. Here we show for the first time the expression profile of ZnT8 in the retina. The ONL, OPL, GCL, and NFL tissue layers of the retina exhibited the strongest ZnT8 expression, whereas the PRL, INL and IPL showed moderate ZnT8 immunoreactivity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that hypoxic/ischemic insult has mediated a significant downregulation of ZnT8 at the message and protein levels, in vitro and in vivo. The ZnT8-depleted cells were primarily localized in the photoreceptor layers/neurosensory retina. Our data also suggest that a treatment with YC-1, a small molecule inhibitor of HIF-1, at a concentration of 100 µM on P12 and P15, rescues the injured retina by restoring the ZnT8 expression to basal homeostatic level, which was comparable to those of the nontreated normoxic retinas. It is noteworthy that although YC-1 inhibition of HIF-1 seems to rescue the ischemia-induced retinal damage, and despite the plethora of published literature available showing the beneficial outcomes of inhibiting HIF-1; several studies have indicated that inhibition of HIF-1 is detrimental during ischemic or hypoxic injury. These studies have demonstrated that during diabetic complications, the cellular response to hypoxia has been shown to be impaired, and hyperglycemia appears to be the critical event implicated in such deregulation, most likely as a result of destabilization of HIF-1. Hence, impairment of the regulation of HIF-1 may have several deleterious consequences for cell and tissue adaptation and survival at low oxygen levels. This apparent anomaly is difficult to reconcile but possibly related to different experimental models. Taken together, this study extends the possible use of YC-1 as a therapeutic agent in through its effect on Zn++ homeostasis. Combined with our in vivo finding; our data raises the possibility that under ischemic conditions, glial cells are the predominant source of ZnT8, and YC-1 may be upregulating ZnT8 expression by acting directly on retinal glial cells. Moreover, our data raise an interesting possibility that glial malfunction may play a crucial role in the molecular mechanism(s), which links DM and ischemic retinopathy through the expression of ZnT-8. Whether the reduced expression of ZnT8 is paralleled by significant changes in Zn++ homeostasis is yet to be determined. This can be revealed through experiments measuring the intracellular Zn++ directly. In addition, ZnT8 knockout animals might prove very useful in addressing this issue. It is however likely, that since the zinc role is intimately linked to AMD, which is an ocular pathology that is manifested during oxygen-induced retinopathy; the possibility exists that reduced ZnT8 expression in our model might be reflected by the significant changes in Zn++ homeostasis due to ischemic insults. Moreover, since ZnT8 is responsible for transporting Zn++ from the cytosol to the intra-cellular vesicles, it is highly possible that reduced ZnT8 expression may lead to the accumulation of Zn++ in the cytosol; hence induce toxicity. This might be supported by the findings of other studies, which demonstrated that in pressure-induced ischemia; zinc has been shown to be toxic and therefore, endogenous zinc may contribute to ischemic neuronal death in the retina. Our data have indicated that treatment with YC-1, a small molecule inhibitor of HIF-1 reversed the decreased ZnT8 expression levels, in vivo and in vitro. This investigation suggests that YC-1 may play a crucial neuroprotective role against ischemic insult. However, we should highlight that future studies should possibly address the use of different HIF-1 inhibitors in order to solidify our findings.