Introduction Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are maintained, and their physiology regulated, in specialized microenvironments known as the stem cell niche. In the adult bone marrow (BM) two different stem cell niches have been proposed; the endosteal niche, where the osteoblasts are believed to maintain the quiescence and promote self-renewal of HSCs, and the vascular niche, where cells of the endothelial lineage or perivascular cells support the HSCs. While many studies have been performed that examined the molecular and cellular interactions between the stem cells and the endosteal niche cells, little is know regarding the interactions between the stem cells and the cell types that comprise the vascular niche. It has been shown that 60% of HSCs in the adult BM are in contact with sinusoidal endothelium, while only 14% are at the endosteal surface. However, it is not known if direct contact with endothelial cells (ECs) in the vascular niche is required for self-renewal of HSCs as the mechanisms for the support remain relatively unknown. Previous studies examined the ability of primary adult mice ECs from non-hematopoietic organs such as heart, brain, liver, lung and kidney to support hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC). Using in vitro co-culture assays as well as in vivo competitive repopulation assays, these studies demonstrated differences in the supportive ability of the ECs, as brain and heart ECs could expand the HSC population, while lung and liver ECs maintained the hematopoietic cells. However, the mechanism of support was not addressed. Bis, an anti-apoptotic and stress response protein, has been identified as an important protein for the vascular niche with Bis−/− mice demonstrating a defect in sinusoidal endothelium, as well as a loss of stromal cells expressing CXCL-12 or IL-7. Yet, the specific mechanisms directly influencing the HSCs are not known. Similarly, pleiotrophin (PTN) has been proposed as a secreted component of the BM vascular niche as PTN−/− mice demonstrated a reduction in BM HSCs. But these effects were only correlated with an expression of PTN in BM ECs. Recently, a functional regulatory effect of ECs on HSCs has been reported. Here, a primary human EC line expressing the adenoviral E4ORF1 gene could promote self-renewal of murine LT-HSCs in vitro which could thus augment BM repopulation in vivo. The mechanism of action was related to the Notch pathway as Notch ligand expression on the BMECs promoted expansion of LT-HSCs in vivo. The relevance of these studies to the in vivo setting is unknown as the ECs were of human origin and the support of murine HSCs was investigated. However, the authors have recently further expanded these observations to demonstrate that human CD34+ cells co-cultured on these ECs are able to expand their in vivo repopulation potential compared to cells cultured in cytokines alone. More recent investigations into the mechanisms of support of primitive HSCs by ECs have came from Ding and colleagues who specifically deleted stem cell factor (SCF) from various proposed components of the niche and examined the effects on the primitive cells. Here, they showed that SCF expression from ECs is essential for HSC function, while deletion of expression from other stromal cell types in the BM does not affect the primitive hematopoietic cells. Similar studies from the same group, as well as another independent group, have also found that deletion of CXCL12 from endothelial cells led to a specific decline in HSC number or function in the adult BM. However, in all of these studies, direct interactions between the HSCs and the ECs themselves were not addressed. We wished to determine which specific cells of the murine BM vascular niche plays a predominant role in controlling HSPC physiology, and the mechanism by which the vascular niche may directly exert its effects. Previous studies have suggested that HSPCs isolated from different regions of the BM microenvironment have different biological potentials. We hypothesized that niche-related elements contributed to these effects and therefore examined whether the ECs comprising the vascular niche derived from different regions of the BM have differing effects on the regulation of HSPCs. We demonstrated that central marrow ECs showed enhanced support of HSPC growth in vitro. This correlated with expression of placental growth factor (PlGF), a factor which has been shown to be essential for the recovery of the hematopoietic system following BM myelosuppression. Using genetic knockdown strategies, we demonstrate a role for PlGF in the support of primitive cells in vitro. Further, by using an in vivo model of recovery from radiation induced myelosuppression, we demonstrate that by transplanting central marrow EC to sublethally irradiated mice, the recovery from myelosuppression was accelerated. However this effect was abrogated upon administration of PlGF knockdown central marrow ECs.