Materials and Methods Animals 6 to 8 week-old male C57Bl/6 and Balb/c mice (Taconic Farms Inc, Oxnard, CA) were obtained and used in accordance with the University of Southern California (USC) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines. These studies were approved by the USC IACUC, Protocol # 11601. USC is fully accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC; Assurance # A3518–01). Mice were housed in sterilized microisolator cages and received autoclaved food and water ad libitum. They were monitored daily for signs of distress and measures and sacrificed at the study end points using CO2 delivered by compressed gas followed by cervical dislocation. Isolation of murine BM cells C57Bl/6 mice were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxiation and cervical dislocation, and the femora and tibia were dissected. To prepare the central marrow mononuclear cells (MNCs), the BM from the femora and tibia were flushed in Minimum Essential Medium, Alpha (α-MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; all from Mediatech Inc.) using a 1 ml syringe with 25-gauge needle (BD Biosciences). To prepare the endosteal marrow cells, the marrow-depleted femora and tibia were cut into 1–2 mm diameter fragments and crushed in α-MEM with 10% FBS using a mortar and pestle and incubated at 37°C with a type I collagenase (3 mg/mL; Worthington) in α-MEM with 10% FBS for 90 minutes at 37°C. The cell suspensions were filtered through a 70-μm cell strainer (BD Biosciences). Culture conditions of ECs and stromal cells (SCs) from murine BM cells BM MNCs from the central marrow and endosteal marrow were plated on rat plasma vitronectin (Sigma-Aldrich) coated 25 cm2 flasks (BD Biosciences) at a density of 1×106 cells/cm2 in EC basal medium (EBM-2) supplemented with a cytokine cocktail (SingleQuots; Clonetics) containing 5% FBS, as previously reported. For cultivation of SCs, BM MNCs from the central marrow and endosteal marrow were plated on 25 cm2 flasks at a concentration of 1×106 cells/cm2 in long term culture medium (M5300; StemCell Technologies). The cultures of ECs or SCs were replaced with new media every 3 days for 10 days. Fluorescence immunocytochemistry ECs or SCs were plated in 4-well plates (BD Biosciences) and fixed with cold paraformaldehyde (4%) for 15 minutes. The cells were then incubated with blocking buffer, followed by rat anti-mouse CD31 (BD Pharmingen) and goat anti-mouse VE-cadherin (R&D Systems) overnight at 4°C. Secondary FITC-labeled antibodies (goat anti rat IgG, Rabbit anti goat IgG; Sigma Aldrich) were then added for 1 hour at room temperature. Cells were mounted in Vectashield medium with DAPI (Vector Lab) to preserve fluorescence and counterstain nuclei. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining ECs or SCs were plated in 24-well plates and stained for ALP activity according to the manufacture's instructions (Takara, MK300).  In vitro DiI-Ac-LDL labeling ECs were plated in 24-well plates and incubated with 10 µg/ml DiI-ac-LDL (Invitrogen) for 4 hours at 37°C, washed four times with PBS and then fixed with paraformaldehyde (4%). Cells were then mounted in Vectashield with DAPI.  In vitro capillary tube formation 3×104 ECs were harvested in 200 μl EBM-2 medium supplemented with the cytokine cocktail and 50 ng/ml VEGF (PeproTech Inc), and were plated in 48-well plate coated with 150 μl Matrigel (BD Biosciences) for 1 hour at 37°C. Capillary tube formation on Matrigel was observed after 5–16 hours of incubation. Lentivirus production and transduction into the BM ECs Small inhibitory hairpin RNAs (shRNA) sequences targeting PlGF were purchased from Open Biosystems. The packaging plasmid psPAX2 and the envelope plasmid pMD2G were a kind gift of Dr. Wange Lu. Recombinant lentiviruses were individually produced by transient transfection of 293T cells using calcium phosphate transfection. Viral supernatants were collected 48 and 72 hours after transfection and passed through a 0.45 µm filter (Nalgene). For EC transductions, viral supernatant was added when the ECs reached about 70%–80% confluent. A non-targeting shRNA sequence (GFP shRNA) was used as a control. Drug selection with puromycin (8 μg/ml) was initiated 24 hour after transduction, and the culture was then maintained under drug selection conditions. Quantitative reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was extracted using the RNA Miniprep Kit (Stratagene) and reverse-transcribed into cDNA using the SuperScript VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. To quantify the expression of Tie-2, VE-Cadherin, vascular endothelial growth factor a (VEGFa), vascular endothelial growth factor b (VEGFb) and PlGF, Taqman Gene Expression Assay primers and probe sets (Applied Biosystems and Roche Diagnostics) were used. Expression of HPRT served as an endogenous control. Levels of gene expression were quantified with using the 7900HT real-time polymerase chain reaction system (Applied Biosystems). Standard curves were created with the use of QPCR mouse reference total RNA (Stratagene). Flow cytometric analysis ECs or SCs were harvested from culture flasks using cell dissociation solution (Sigma) treatment, and stained with the EC-specific markers anti-mouse CD31, Flk-1, Sca-1 and the hematopoietic cell marker anti-mouse CD45 (all from eBioscience). The stained cells were filtered through 30 µm nylon mesh, and then the cell populations in the ECs or SCs culture condition were determined. For measuring the frequency of HSPCs in the BM, the BM MNCs from Balb/c mice were incubated in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Mediatech Inc) with phycoerythrin (PE) conjugated anti mouse Sca-1, PE-cyanine 7 (PE-Cy7) cojugated anti mouse c-kit, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated anti mouse CD48 and allophycocyanin (APC) conjugated anti mouse CD150. Concurrently, cells were incubated with a biotin lineage cocktail. After primary antibody incubation, cells were stained with PE-cyanine 5 (PE-Cy5) streptavidin (All from BD Biosciences). Cell frequencies were measured on an LSR II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Flow cytometric sorting MNCs were obtained as described above. Cells were then incubated in PBS (Mediatech Inc) with peridinin chlorophyll protein (PerCP) anti mouse CD45, phycoerythrin (PE) anti mouse CD31, and biotin anti-mouse TER-119. After primary antibody incubation, cells were stained with Allophycocyanin-Cy7 (APC-Cy7) streptavidin (All from BD Biosciences). The endothelial cells and stromal cells were determined as CD45-TER-119−CD31+ and CD45−TER-119−CD31− respectively. To obtain the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, the bone marrow MNCs were stained with PE anti mouse Sca-1, PE-cyanine 7 (PE-Cy7) anti mouse c-kit and a biotin lineage cocktail (CD3e, CD11b, B220, Gr-1, and TER-119). After primary antibody incubation, cells were stained with peridinin chlorophyll protein (PercP) streptavidin (All from BD Biosciences). The stained cells were sorted with the use of a FACSAria™ flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) on the basis of established cell surface phenotype. Co-culture of LSK cells ECs and SCs were harvested, irradiated at 15Gy, and plated in 12-well plates (2×105 cells per well) in serum free medium. BM LSK cells were then added at 1×103 cells per well and maintained at 37°C/5% CO2. After 7 days, nonadherent cells were harvested by washing the monolayers gently with warm PBS three times. The number of hematopoietic cells was measured as CD45+ cells by flow cytometry. To analyze the number of CFU-Cs, 1×102 LSK cells per well were co-cultured with the irradiated ECs or SCs in 12-well plates. The nonadherent cells were collected, and then suspended in MethoCult GF M3434 (StemCell Technologies) and cultured at 37°C/5% CO2 in a humidified atmosphere. The number of CFU-Cs was scored on day 8 according to standard criteria. Cobblestone area-forming cell (CAFC) assay BM MNCs or purified LSK cells were seeded in serial dilutions on a confluent layer of central marrow ECs, central marrow SCs, spleen ECs, PlGF knock down ECs and mock transduced ECs which were previously irradiated at 15Gy, or OP9 stromal cells that were previously irradiated at 35 Gy. Cells were maintained in α-MEM supplemented with 10%FBS at 33°C in a 5% CO2 incubator with weekly half-medium changes. The presence of cobblestone areas was scored on day14, 28, 35, 42 and 49. The frequency of CAFCs was calculated with the use of L-Calc™ software (StemCell Technologies).  In vivo homing and lodgment The cultured ECs, PlGF knock down ECs, mock transduced ECs and the cultured SCs, were harvested and labeled with carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFDA-SE; Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The labeled cells were injected into the tail vein of the Balb/c mice that were irradiated at 550cGy approximately 4 hours before transplantation on day 0, and then injected to mice intraperitoneally on day 1 to 4 (1×106 cells per mouse per day). The mice were then sacrificed on day 5, and the frequency of labeled cells was measured by the detection of CFDA-SE+ cells in the BM and spleen by flow cytometry. To assess the lodgment of injected cells to bone marrow, the tibias from the Balb/c mice were dissected on day 5 after irradiation, decalcified for 3 days in Immunocal (Decal Chemical Corporation), and embedded in paraffin blocks after processing. 5 µm serial sections of tibia were cut and mounted with Vectashield containing 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vector Laboratories). Immunohistochemistry For detection of VE-cadherin, paraffin sections of femur were antigen-retrieved using Target Retrieval Solution (DAKO, CA) followed by endogenous peroxidase (3% H2O2) and nonspecific protein block (5% BSA, 10% donkey serum, and 0.02% Tween-20), then incubated with goat anti-mouse VE-cadherin (R&D Systems) overnight at 4°C. Slides were incubated with secondary antibody biotin conjugated donkey anti-goat IgG (Jackson IR) for 1 hour and streptavidin horseradish peroxidase (Jackson IR) for 30 minutes at room temperature, and then were developed with DAB staining kit (DAKO) for 5 minutes at room temperature and counterstained in Mayer's hematoxylin. A cover-slip was applied to the slides with the use of the Cytoseal XYL mounting medium (Richard-Allan Scientific). The light phase image was collected using Zeiss Axio Imager Z1 and Zeiss Axio observer A1 fluorescence microscope with Axiovision Rel 4.8 software (Carl Zeiss). Statistical analysis Comparison of experimental groups was performed using the paired or unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test as appropriate for the dataset. p<0.05 was considered significant.