Introduction Zinc (Zn++) is the second most abundant transition metal in mammals. Since Zn++ is utilized in a number of biological processes, its homeostasis is tightly controlled on both; the systemic and cellular levels via different mechanisms. Zinc homeostasis is regulated by an array of zinc transporters, controlling its movement from the extracellular space to the cytosol, and from the cytosol to intravesicular space. Two types of transporters exist; zinc transporter (ZnT) and Zrt- and Irt-like proteins (ZIP). There are 10 ZnTs (SLC30A) and 14 ZIPs (SLC39A), which have been identified in mammals with different tissue expression, cellular localization and regulation, and their expression is dependent on tissue and cellular status. The SLC30A efflux is localized in the membrane of the insulin secretory vesicles and it facilitates the accumulation of zinc from the cytoplasm into the insulin-containing vesicles. It plays a major role in providing zinc for insulin maturation and/or storage processes. Whereas the SCL39A influx transporter family, Zrt-Irt-like Protein (ZIP) acts in an opposing manner to increase intracellular Zn++ levels. A major role of Zn++ in the pathogenesis of DM is not surprising since Zn in β cell secretory vesicles is essential for insulin hexamerization. This is supported by the findings that polymorphism in a genetic variant of ZnT8 (SLC30A8) is associated with increased risk of type 2 DM (T2DM). Furthermore, ZnT8 (SLC30A8) has been reported as an auto-antigen and a major susceptibility gene for type 1DM (T1DM) and T2DM, respectively. These autoantibodies are present in 60–80% of new cases of T1DM. Dysregulation in Zn++ homeostasis is firmly implicated in the pathophysiology of many acute neural injuries and chronic neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, perturbations in Zn++ homeostasis disrupt carbohydrate metabolism; however, the inverse relationship is also true: DM and hyperglycemia alter Zn++ balance, promoting hypozincemia and hyperzincuria. The importance of Zn++ in biological processes is crucial to housekeeping proteins, cellular metabolism, and gene expression. It provides structural stability to the Zn++ finger domains of many DNA-binding proteins and is a cofactor for more than 300 metalloenzymes, in which it is an essential element for the catalytic and/or structural integrity. Beta cells have insulin-containing vesicles, which also contain high intracellular concentrations of Zn++. Furthermore, Zn++ facilitates the packaging of insulin into hexamers through two Zn++ ions, a step necessary for insulin crystallization. Chimienti and co-workers originally described the zinc transporter encoded by SLC30A8; ZnT8, as a pancreatic islet-expressed protein is associated with the ZnT family of intracellular Zn++ transports. Loss of ZnT8 from pancreatic β cells reduces insulin content and compromises insulin release. Interest in the role of zinc in the pathogenesis of DM was re-erupted with the discovery of the association between T2DM and a genetic polymorphism in the SLC30A8 gene. This polymorphism, which is caused by the minor allele of the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs1226634 (C/T transition; Arg {325}–Trp 273 {325}), was subsequently shown to be associated with the presence of altered glucose homeostasis, pancreatic β cell dysfunction, or overt T2DM in many but not all study populations. Furthermore, the insulin producing pancreatic β cells contain some of the highest levels of Zn++ in the body. This high Zn++ content is largely due to the critical function of Zn++ for insulin synthesis, secretion and signaling, and the role that may play in the protection against oxidative stresses. Zinc deficiency may predispose individuals to DM and its cardiovascular complications. Overall, ZnT8 may contribute to the pathogenesis of DM due to autoantigenic properties as well as decreased protein function, which may be exacerbated by polymorphic variance. Zn++ plays an essential role in the retinal function; this is echoed by its relatively high content in ocular tissue with the retinal being the highest. It has been revealed that the RPE and the choroid contain the highest levels of zinc concentrations in the retina. Several reports addressed the role of Zn++ in oxidative damage to the retina. In addition interactions between Zn++ and the antioxidant amino acid taurine have long been addressed. Recent studies have indicated that the intracellular localization of Zn++ pools in photoreceptors changes with light exposure, with the greatest intensity of Zn++ staining observed in the perikarya of photoreceptors of dark-adapted retinas and in the inner segments of light-adapted retinas. Furthermore, the expression of ZnT8 has been detected in the primary human fetal RPE cultures and human ARPE19 cell line; whereas pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) induced a strong increase of ZnT8 mRNA levels in these cells. In addition, it has been reported that ZnT8 is upregulated in the RPE cell layer located in the mouse retina of the Hfe−/− mouse. The Hfe−/− mouse is a knockout mouse model of hereditary hemochromatosis; a common autosomal recessive disease characterized by increased iron absorption and progressive iron storage that results in damage to major organs in the body. The Hfe−/− mouse exhibits profound differences in parameters of iron homeostasis. Given the importance of tightly-regulated zinc homeostasis for normal retinal cell physiology, we examined whether the effects of ischemia/hypoxia on Müller cells, in vivo and in vitro, may be mediated, in part, through altered expression of zinc transporters. This study aims to address the impact of ischemic injury on the expression of ZNT-8 in glial cells and the ischemic retina. This investigation has also examined the effects of YC-1 treatment on the expression of ZnT8 transporter expression in the Müller cell line (rMC-1) and the injured ischemic retina.