Discussion Carbon nanotubes show many unique intrinsic physical, mechanical, electrical, and chemical properties, and have been intensively explored for biological and biomedical applications in the past few years. Because the physical properties of CNTs are essentially preserved by the noncovalent approach, aqueous solutions of CNTs engineered by noncovalent functionalization are promising for multiple biomedical applications. High doses of NA have protective effects on beta-cell survival and function in animal and in vitro studies, and NA has been shown to increase the insulin content in insulin-producing cells. Moreover, several protocols have used NA as a differentiation factor. NA is also suggested to have a stimulatory effect on islet regeneration. Several studies have confirmed that NA promotes replication of mouse islet cells both in culture and after transplantation. Further, Otonkoski et al showed that the addition of NA to the culture medium of human fetal pancreatic cells increased both the total cell number and the frequency of beta cells. Other authors used a protocol in which insulin-secreting cells (clone IB/3x-99) were cultured in 10 mmol/L NA for 2 weeks followed by another week in 10 mmol/L NA plus 5 mmol/L glucose. They noted that the insulin content of the cells increased 20-fold and that the cells showed a good insulin response to different secretagogues. Vaca et al demonstrated that the combination of nutrient restriction and NA supplementation decreases the rate of proliferation and substantially increases the insulin content (1.780 ng insulin/mg protein) in D3 mouse embryonic stem cell culture, a value 3-fold greater than the values obtained by other authors, suggesting that NA may increase insulin synthesis. Therefore, NA plus nutrient restriction increases insulin content and improves the last steps in the maturation process under experimental conditions in which undesired proliferation is controlled. It has been shown previously that the MIF content of pancreatic islets was increased by high glucose concentrations, while immunoneutralization of MIF in a perifusion system of Langerhans islets reduced the first and second phases of glucose-induced insulin secretion by 39% and 31%, respectively. Conversely, exogenously added recombinant MIF was found to potentiate glucose-induced insulin release. Therefore, MIF appears to be a glucose-dependent islet cell product that regulates insulin secretion in a positive manner. Evidence supporting the role of MIF in upregulating insulin secretion comes also from another experiment demonstrating that administration of recombinant MIF in vitro upregulates PDX-1 and insulin gene transcription in mouse islets. Another glucose-induced insulin secretion test performed in vitro showed that pancreatic islets isolated from MIF knockout mice produced less insulin than wild-type C57BL/6 islets but had a higher insulin content within beta-cells. Further, it appears that MIF regulates insulin secretion in physiologic conditions, whereas in pathologic states it alters beta-cell function and induces their apoptosis or necrosis and affects beta-cell neoplasia. Likewise, recent epidemiologic data support the role of MIF in the development of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in humans. While much progress has been made in the treatment of diabetes mellitus as well as in the study of beta-cell lines, a proper procedure to generate a sufficient mass of insulin-producing cells that display regulated release has not been found as yet. Considering the many potent actions of NA on pancreatic islet cells in animal models and its use in clinical trials to preserve beta-cell function, as well as the exciting properties of CNTs as drug carriers and delivery vehicles, we have characterized the effects of NA-MWCNTs on the function and insulin production of 1.4E7 insulin-secreting cells. Insulinoma cell lines, which display several undifferentiated characteristics even though retaining some of the features of normal islets (for example, peptide hormone biosynthesis and secretion), have applications in the study of pancreatic biology, providing a method of producing pure insulin-secreting cell lines. This is an alternative to the use of primary tissue in cell transplantation therapies for type 1 diabetes. Hence, the 1.4E7 line offers clues on how to generate corresponding human beta-cell lines that may be useful for research and for cell replacement therapy in diabetes. As far as we know, we have noted for the first time that 1.4E7 cells treated with NA-MWCNTs show increased insulin production and regulated insulin secretion as compared with administration of NA or MWCNTs alone. Our immunocytochemistry staining data suggest a strong interaction between NA-MWCNTs and the MIF signaling pathway that regulates insulin secretion, thereby suggesting strategies for developing continuously growing human beta-cell lines. Nevertheless, further investigations are required for a careful assessment of unexpected toxicities and biological interactions of NA-MWCNTs inside the living organism. Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.