Discussion Initial studies of the HSC niche focused on the endosteal and vascular niche as being distinct entities, with the endosteal niche supporting the LT-HSCs, while the vascular niche supports ST-HSCs. More recent data has suggested that they may be indistinct and that both the osteoblasts and EC play key roles, potentially in the same niche. However, the question still remains as to what role the EC is playing in the niche and what are the molecular signals by which it exerts its effects. In addition, while cells of the osteoblast lineage are specifically localized to the endosteal surface, ECs are found in different regions of the BM. Whether these ECs in different regions of the BM differentially regulate HSPCs has not been explored. ECs are known to release angiocrine factors, such as growth factors or chemokines, which promote organogenesis and cell differentiation. These angiocrine factors are also known to affect hematopoiesis. Recently, it has been reported that angiocrine expression of the Notch ligands Jagged 1 and Jagged 2 on human ECs is necessary for the support of LT-HSCs. VEGF is known to regulate HSC repopulation and survival, as well as coordinate with Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) to induce mobilization of HSCs by temporal and regional activation of VEGF/VEGFR2 and Ang-1/Tie-2 signaling pathways. In addition, PlGF promoted recruitment of VEGFR1+ HSCs from a quiescent to a proliferative BM microenvironment, favoring differentiation, mobilization and reconstitution of hematopoiesis. We compared the effects of ECs or SCs isolated from the endosteal or central region of the BM, or the spleen on the support of growth of HSPCs in vitro to mimic the complexity of the BM microenvironment in vivo. We demonstrated that the ECs from the BM were superior in their ability to maintain primitive hematopoietic cells, with the central marrow ECs showing enhanced support at longer time intervals. In addition, central marrow ECs supported increased proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells. We also found that the expression of PlGF was significantly increased in the central marrow ECs compared to other supportive cells. This effect of central marrow ECs on supporting primitive hematopoietic cells growth in vitro was diminished when expression of PlGF was knocked down. Hence, we proposed that secreted PlGF from BM ECs may influence the physiology of HSCs, although we could not rule out an autocrine action on the ECs themselves as well. While it has been shown that osteoblasts are key constituents of the HSC niche under homeostatic conditions, it has been proposed that they do not play a role in hematopoietic reconstitution after myeloablation, rather this is the role of the ECs. In our in vivo model of recovery from radiation induced myeloablation, different cell populations were transplanted into sublethally irradiated mice. It has been shown that transplanted ECs do not engraft in the BM, however, peripheral blood, bone marrow, liver or lung derived ECs have also been isolated in vitro and the transplanted ECs could restore impaired neovascularization in a hind limb ischemia or myocardial ischemia model. In our study the transplanted BM ECs were able to home and lodge in the BM, either at or adjacent to the vasculature. They also had a positive effect on the recovery of hematopoiesis as evidenced by an increased frequency of primitive hematopoietic cells. These effects were specific for ECs, since the transplanted BM SCs were only able to induce HPC recovery, as assessed by the week 2 CAFC assay, and were not detected in BM. Correlating with the in vitro assays, knockdown of PlGF expression in the BM ECs reduced the effect down to no cell treatment levels. However, these effects may be simply due to a lack of homing of the cells specifically to the BM vasculature. This highlights a complicating factor in these studies, which is that the effect of PlGF was to also stimulate normal sinusoid vessel recovery, potentially through the specific migration of the ECs to the bone marrow endothelium. Therefore, as is the case in many studies of the vascular niche, separating direct effects on the primitive hematopoietic cells from effects on the vasculature which may then further promote the reconstitution of the HSPCs becomes challenging. Taken together, our data demonstrate that ECs in the BM vascular niche are involved in the regeneration of HSPCs and that PlGF plays a role in this overall process. Whether or not this mechanism is also involved in the regulation of HSC self-renewal and quiescence at the endosteal surface was not addressed, but it is possible that different mechanisms may occur here. Future studies may be required to delineate the potential role of different HSC niches in the bone marrow and how they regulate hematopoiesis as a whole.