Introduction Over the past three decades, the number of patients with diabetes mellitus has more than doubled globally, making diabetes one of the most important public health challenges for all nations. A 2011 report from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that approximately one million Americans have type 1 diabetes mellitus. Type 1 diabetes is the most common childhood metabolic disease. Currently, insulin replacement is the first-line treatment option for patients with type 1 diabetes and severe forms of type 2 diabetes. Treatment by insulin injection is generally effective but nonphysiologic, and has the major disadvantage of producing chronic complications. On the other hand, islet transplantation can maintain normoglycemia without hypoglycemic side effects, with the major clinical impact of releasing diabetics from insulin dependence. However, the transplanted islets tend to lose their functional ability over time. Therefore, while allotransplantation or xenotransplantation still imposes important problems, the use of tumoral B-cell lines could be a potential solution, especially given that various neoplastic cell lines have demonstrated changes characteristic of differentiation after treatment with specific chemical agents. Hence, sodium butyrate increased the transcription of the glucagon and insulin genes in rat insulinoma cells, suggesting that these cells acquired more differentiated characteristics. Moreover, clones displaying the most appropriate patterns of insulin secretion can be selected and amplified at low cost, thus providing a method of producing pure insulin-secreting cells with applications in the study of pancreatic cell biology. However, in addition to retaining their neoplastic nature and presenting primitive differentiating features of the parent cells, the bulk of these cell lines progressively lose their insulin biosynthesis and regulated secretion with successive numbers of passages. Despite good progress, several obstacles remain to be overcome before insulin-producing cell transplantation can be translated into a therapy for human patients. The evidence suggests that nicotinamide (NA), a derivative of nicotinic acid, has many effects on beta-cell survival and functions, by acting as a free radical scavenger or as a precursor for NA adenine dinucleotide (NAD). NA is also an inhibitor of poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) synthetase, a chromatin-associated enzyme involved in cellular DNA repair and differentiation which, if activated during DNA repair synthesis, could lead to a critical decrease in NAD levels in beta-cells. The activity of poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) synthetase is linked with the level of cellular differentiation in several cell types. Further, it has been postulated that poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) synthetase inhibitors, such as NA, may counteract suppression of beta-cell DNA replication, thus inducing beta-cell regeneration. NA has also been reported to affect insulin production and cell proliferation in adult mouse islets in culture and following transplantation. Moreover, increases in insulin production and content of cultured fetal pig islet-like cell clusters have been seen as a consequence of beta-cell neoformation through differentiation. Hence, in stem cell research, several protocols have used NA as a differentiation factor. Preliminary data from the literature support the involvement of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in stimulating insulin secretion. This implication is supported by the fact that, as shown by immunocytochemistry, MIF and insulin colocalize within the secretory granules of the pancreatic islet beta-cells, and once released, MIF appears to regulate insulin release in an autocrine fashion. MIF is also highly expressed in several insulin-secreting cell lines, and its production is regulated by glucose in a time-dependent and concentration-dependent manner. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have many unique physical, mechanical, electrical, and chemical properties, and have been intensively explored for biological and biomedical applications in the past few years. Extensive reports have explored CNTs as potential drug carriers and delivery vehicles. CNTs can be functionalized with pharmacologically active biomolecules by forming stable covalent bonds or supramolecular assemblies based on noncovalent interactions. Once the cargos are delivered into various cells, they are able to overexpress their physiologic functions. Considering all these data, we hypothesized that combined administration of both NA and CNTs would function as powerful nanobiosystems to improve the capacity of insulin-producing cells to generate and release insulin. This study shows that administration of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) functionalized with nicotinamide (NA-MWCNTs) leads to significant insulin production and glucose-induced insulin secretion in 1.4E7 beta-cells via the MIF pathway.