Representative 2-DE gel pattern of soybean leaves at 72 h post-inoculation with B. maydis. For isoelectric focusing, a total of 500 μg/600 μL proteins were loaded onto each 24-cm IPG strip (pH 4–7). This was followed by SDS-PAGE on a 12.5% gel and Coomassie staining. 2-DE maps of proteins from untreated control leaves or leaves treated with B. maydis are shown. Proteins differentially regulated in response to B. maydis were numbered in pairs of control and treatment maps. The MW (kDa) and pI of each protein was determined using a 2-DE marker. Two DE patterns of stem proteins responding to B. maydis. S7 and S2 show enlarged images of protein spots 7 and 2, which were differentially expressed under B. maydis stress conditions; “C” refers to the protein pattern dissolved on the control gel, and “T” to the protein pattern dissolved on the treatment gel. The differential abundance of proteins was read using the PDQuest software and is plotted as the relative intensity enumerated in E7 and E2. E7 and E2 represent the relative expression of protein spots 7 and 2 in the control and treatment groups. “C” also refers to the control, and “T” to treatment. S7/E7 and S2/E2 are representative images of the differentially expressed proteins in the stems of soybean plants. Two-DE map of root proteins responding to B. maydis. S1 and S15 were zoomed in the protein spot 1 and spot 15 differentially expressed under the B. maydis stress; “C” refers to the protein spot excised from the control gel, and “T” refers to the protein spot excised from the treatment gel. The differential abundance of proteins was determined using the PDQuest software and was plotted as the relative intensity enumerated as ES1 and ES15. ES1 and ES15 represent the relative expression between control and treatment of protein spot 1 and spot 15, “C” means control, and “T” indicates treatment. S1/ES1 and S15/ES15 are representative differentially expressed root proteins. Proteins responsive to B. maydis and its predicted multiple subcellular locations. A) A conceptual diagram of a systematic NHR of soybean against B. maydis. H2O2 production and callose deposition were processed upon the interaction between soybean and B. maydis starting at the cell wall of soybean. The subcellular locations of the differentially expressed proteins were predicted. Changed proteins are shown in italics, and the organelle is written in blue. For instance, Hsp 70 was predicted to exist in chloroplasts and mitochondria. All of the major organelles responded to B. maydis. B) Venn diagram representing the differentially expressed proteins found in the leaves, stems, and roots of soybean plants. An L, S, or R character was placed before the spots (corresponding to the 2-DE pattern) corresponding to leaf, stem, and root proteins. Two pairs of leaf and stem protein spots were attributed to the same protein, L17 and S24, and L34 and S7. There was only one pair of stem and root protein spots that was attributed to the same protein, S15 and R13. However, no protein overlap between leaf and root was detected. 
Arabidopsis DB-based BLAST analysis of the interaction network of 64 differentially expressed proteins in the roots, stems, and leaves of soybean plants in response to B. maydis. GO analysis indicated that the 38 red nodes in A might be involved in metabolic processes (P value = 1.070e −10). Another 35 red nodes in B were involved in stimulus response (P value = 3.970e −10). Thirty proteins belonged to the both metabolic process and response to stimulus, which suggested that the same protein could perform different functions in soybean plants in response to B. maydis stress.