Discussion Competitive and facilitative interactions among different plant species have played major roles in shaping natural communities. For decades, this principle has been employed to increase crop yield. Plants sense their environments using chemicals, touch, and light. In maize/soybean intercropping systems, the transfer of B. maydis spores from maize to soybeans is a common occurrence. There have been several reports of interactions between maize and soybeans, and these have been extensively used to increase yield or improve soil fertility. However, there has been no report discussing the interactions between soybeans and B. maydis, which often come into contact in ecological networks involving maize and soybean intercropping systems. Therefore, the findings of the present study not only offer new insights into NHR in the soybean response to B. maydis, but also into the positive interactions mediated by B. maydis between soybeans and maize. This is the first detailed study on how B. maydis mediates interactions between maize and soybeans. Whole-plant resistance is invoked in almost all of cellular components of the soybean plant Although B. maydis was sprayed only onto the leaves of the soybean plants, proteins of the stem and roots also responded to this particular stimulus (Figs 1, 2, 3 and 4). These results suggest that the response of soybeans to B. maydis may not be limited to the site of exposure, and that the signal of the stimulus could be transmitted to remote organs. The level of expression of several proteins was reprogrammed far from the site of inoculation. Only one pair of root and stem protein spots consisted of the same protein, e.g., S (stem) 15 and R (root) 13, an alpha-1,4-glucan-protein synthase [UDP-forming] homolog. Two pairs of stem and leaf protein spots (L17 and S24) comprised the same protein, the NDK homolog. Leaf protein spot (L34) and stem protein spot (S7) contained an oxygen-evolving enhancer protein homolog. However, there was no protein overlap between leaves and roots. These results suggest that roots, stems, and leaves of soybeans could differentially respond to B. maydis challenge on leaves, which could render a whole plant resistant to B. maydis. Thus, almost all of the metabolic proteins were triggered in almost all subcellular structures. These included the cell wall, cell membrane, cell skeleton, cytoplasm, chloroplasts, mitochondria, nucleus, Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum (Fig 4A). This is the first report to find evidence of a multiple-responsive NHR in soybeans against B. maydis, a pathogenic fungus of a phylogenetically distant crop. Proteins involved in NHR in soybean overlapped with metabolic proteins NHR is strongly associated to basic plant metabolism, and host pathogens are known to target such primary metabolic pathways to establish virulence. The results of the present study showed that proteins related to metabolic processes could be co-induced in response to non-adapted pathogens. For example, the ability of soybean plants to cope with B. maydis stress depends on a number of changes in their proteins, which the present study has determined to be reprogrammed after inoculation of B. maydis on leaves, and the changes remained in effect until at least 72 hpi. Several metabolic proteins in the leaves, stems, and roots of soybeans were invoked in response to B. maydis. Most of these proteins had essential functions, either in the regulation of the response, or in the metabolic process, allowing plants to survive and recover from the stresses. The leaf protein RuBisCO operates as a metabolic branch point, channeling carbon either to the photosynthetic carbon fixation (Calvin–Benson) cycle or to the photorespiratory pathway. It is the most abundant protein in green plant tissues and is a bifunctional enzyme. Its most common form (type I presents in cyanobacteria, green algae, and higher plants) is composed of eight chloroplast-gene-encoded large subunits (~55 kDa) and eight nuclear gene-encoded small subunits (~15 kDa). Two protein spots were identified as RuBisCO large subunits, which suggested that soybean photosynthesis was reprogrammed under B. maydis stress conditions. BAHD acyltransferase catalyzes the acylation of various plant secondary metabolites. The decrease in intensity of BAHD acyltransferase DCR-like (spot 66 in leaf) protein suggests that the metabolites were inhibited under B. maydis stress. The intensity of the spot attributable to 4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase (HDR) f-like protein decreased in response to B. maydis, which is also involved in a pivotal secondary metabolite process in NHR in soybeans (spot 77 in Table 1). Plant isoprenoids are involved in several key biological processes, including membrane fluidity, photosynthesis, growth regulation, cell division, communication, and defense response. Gene knockout has demonstrated that HDR activity is not only essential to Escherichia coli growth, but also plays a key role in plant isoprenoid biosynthesis. Decreases in the intensity of leaf HDR and BAHD proteins suggests that B. maydis stress inhibited the metabolic processes of soybeans or some decrease in fitness is needed for the soybeans to resist B. maydis, although no visible symptoms have been detected. There are many families of cysteine proteases in stems. These are also known as thiol proteases. Among these, C1A cysteine protease is the most abundant enzyme and is responsible for protein degradation during plant senescence. Dozens of lattices from different plant families are known to contain cysteine proteases. Several of these plant proteases accumulate in the central vacuole, from which these can be released as programmed cell death stimuli or other stress cues. These vacuole-localized proteases belong to the C1A family of cysteine proteases and are involved in both developmental and pathogen-related PCD. Stem (spot 16) mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP; EC 3.4.24.64) is a heterodimeric enzyme that plays a pivotal role in mitochondrial protein import. MPP is integrated into a protein complex of the respiratory chain in plants, and plays an essential role in proteolytical processing. The increase in the intensity of spots attributable to the production of subunits of MPP might be due to the NHR of soybean. Heat shock proteins (Hsps) are molecular chaperones that facilitate proper protein folding and function in almost all organisms. These are classified into families based on their molecular weight: Hsps include Hsps 40, 60, 70, 90, and 100. In this present study, some Hsps were detected in either the chloroplasts or mitochondria. Stress often increases the number of unfolded proteins in the cytosol. The unfolded proteins require more molecular chaperones for re-folding, which makes the stressed cell more dependent upon the Hsps than unstressed cells. In the present study, Hsp 70 was detected in stem protein 19, and it showed the most pronounced increase in spot intensity of any protein in the mitochondria (12-fold), which suggested that stem proteins were involved in the response to B. maydis. The eukaryotic translation elongation factor plays an important role in translation elongation. The accumulation of maize chloroplast protein synthesis elongation factor has been reported to alleviate heat stress. Elongation factor 1-delta-like protein was identified in root spot 1 (intensity increased by 2.7-fold) and elongation factor 1-gamma-like protein was found in root spot 19 (increased by 16.7-fold). Both were highly expressed in root cells, which suggested that the high level accumulation of elongation factor might be good evidence that new proteins are produced in soybean roots in response to exposure to the non-adapted pathogen B. maydis. Protein spot 8 was attributed to root proteins related to increased protease concentration. This suggested that the protein degradation process also increased in response to B. maydis (Table 3), which suggested that protein processing occurred in the root organs of soybeans. Some major metabolic processes such as photosynthesis, acylation of plant secondary metabolites, synthesis and degradation of proteins, and protein refolding, were determined to be involved in soybean NHR against B. maydis. Therefore, soybean plants can undergo NHR in response to resistant B. maydis at the expense of metabolism-related proteins. Analysis of the interactions among 64 proteins differentially expressed in the roots, stems, and leaves of soybeans in response to B. maydis provided further bioinformatic evidence of the overlap between metabolism and stimulus response. This analysis was performed using STRING (Fig 5). The results suggested that ~80% of proteins were involved in metabolic processes (P = 1.070e -10) and response to stimulus (P = 3.970e -10). For example, LOS2 is a copper ion binding/phosphopyruvate hydratase. It encodes an enolase that is involved in light-dependent cold tolerance. Its protein is tyrosine-phosphorylated and its phosphorylation state is modulated in response to ABA in Arabidopsis thaliana seeds (www.string.db.org) (Fig 5). BLAST analysis using the Arabidopsis DB was performed. These proteins belonged to both the response pathway and biological processes. This theoretical overlap of metabolism and defense processes was consistent with the observed overlap between metabolic and defense processes (Fig 4, Tables 1–3). Defense-related proteins in response to B. maydis  In addition to co-induction of metabolic proteins against B. maydis, NHR in soybeans also activates defense-related proteins in response to B. maydis. Chitinases expressed during plant-pathogen interactions are associated with plant defense against pathogens, which can catalyze polychitin molecules that are present in the cell walls of most fungi and homologues in plant-pathogen interactions. Plants possess a large reservoir of protease inhibitor (PI) genes, which have been proposed to act as storage proteins, regulators of endogenous proteases, and most notably in defense against herbivores. They have potent applications in resistant crop breeding. However, an Ecc licitor-induced Kunitz trypsin inhibitor gene (AtKTI1) encoding a functional Kunitz type PI protein was isolated in Arabidopsis, and demonstrated that the PI protein played a regulatory role in PCD antagonizing pathogen and FB1-induced cell death. In the present study, the expression of the trypsin inhibitor and acidic chitinase increased in the vacuoles of soybean leaf cells, which indicated that these played key roles in NHR of soybeans to B. maydis. Malate dehydrogenases (MDHs) often use malate or oxaloacetate as substrates to generate pyruvate and preferentially utilize NADP or NAD as cofactors. These differ in their subcellular localization among and within species. The function and regulation of MDH in animals are specifically associated with cell differentiation and proliferation, ontogenic development, hormonal control, and diseases. Stem protein spots 23 and 24 were identified as malate dehydrogenases (MDHs), which suggested that these might play a role in soybean NHR against B. maydis and provide new insights into their regulatory function beyond their classical role in basic metabolism. Isoflavone reductase is an enzyme associated with isoflavonoid biosynthesis in plants, and its overexpression of rice isoflavone reductase-like gene (OsIRL) causes tolerance to reactive oxygen species, thus indicating that rice isoflavone reductase plays an essential role in maintaining the levels of ROS. Root protein spot 16 was identified as soybean isoflavone reductase-like protein, which might be involved in NHR of soybean to B. maydis. Cell-wall-associated kinases (WAKs 1–5) and their isoforms have been shown to functionally mediate differential signals from the extracellular matrix to the cells. Oxygen evolving enhancer protein 1 (OEE1) is a chloroplast protein that acts as an auxiliary component of the photosystem II manganese cluster. A previous study has shown that OEE2 interacts with and acts as a substrate for WAK1, and is phosphorylated via the action of AtGRP-3. Phosphorylation of OEE2 is also induced in Arabidopsis by exposure to the avirulent Pseudomonas syringae. OEE2 is downstream of AtGRP-3/WAK1, and may be involved in defense signaling. OEE1 was upregulated 11-fold in this present study (stem spot 7 and upregulated 2.5-fold in leaf protein spot 34), which suggested that strong defense signaling had been taking place in the soybean cells under the B. maydis stress conditions. In addition, Ning’s results showed that OEE played an important role in photosynthesis and stress resistance for plants. Its subcellular location was predicted in chloroplasts. Similarity and differences of NHR in soybean and other plants The proteomic basis of NHR in the soybean response to B. maydis, a pathogen affecting remotely related species, was assessed. Results showed the soybean NHR response to have many similarities to that of other plants such as callose deposition and H2O2 production. The basic biological processes involved in soybean NHR against B. maydis, including some vital metabolic components for plant growth and development such as RuBisCO, BAHD, and OEE were different from the NHRs of other plants. Soybean NHR involved almost all of the organelle (Fig 4, Table 4); this is the first work to indicate the involvement of NHR in organelles. These results have allowed us to propose a hypothesis relating to soybean NHR, which affected almost all of the organelles in the cells of soybean plants (Fig 4 and Table 4). Soybean NHR against B. maydis is a type I nonhost resistance. Unlike host resistance that is mediated by the products of plant resistance genes (R), which involves pathogen-race- or plant-cultivar-specific interaction, the soybean NHR involved multiple-gene resistance, which involved multiple biological process, cellular components, and molecular functions in response to non-adapted pathogens. This may explain why a pathogen that is virulent to one plant species is nonpathogenic to another. These results could not only be used in intercropping systems involving soybeans but also in rotations involving nonhost plants in an agroecosystem. A preliminary conclusion can be drawn from the results of the present study. Soybeans can respond to B. maydis stimulus and this involves almost all subcellular structures and major metabolic processes and multiple-gene resistance through reprogramming far from the site of inoculation. This response included multiple biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions. Some major proteins such as RuBisCO, BAHD, NDK, and OEE were involved in NHR in soybean and overlapped with metabolic proteins. Proteins related to metabolic processes were co-induced in response to non-adapted pathogens, which differs from the results of previous studies of NHR [1–3; 8–10; 12–13]. Similarly, the expression of acidic chitinases, protease, and Kunitz type PI (protease inhibitor) proteins changed in the vacuoles of soybean leaf cells, which indicated that these played major roles in NHR of soybeans to B. maydis. This is the first report to find evidence for a multiple-responsive NHR in soybeans against B. maydis, a pathogenic fungus of a phylogenetically distant crop. These findings may offer insights into the microbe-mediated interactions between plant species, which play a basic role in shaping natural communities and crop yields. However, identification of the associations among the systematic responses and assessment of resistance at multiple levels in soybeans require further investigation.