Introduction Nonhost resistance (NHR) is a plant immune response against major microorganisms that are pathogenic to other plant species. Unlike R-gene-mediated resistance, which is governed by either a single or a few genes, NHR is mainly controlled by multiple genes expressed in multiple patterns and durable defense responses. Due to its highly robust and exceptional resistance properties, NHR is of scientific and economic importance. Information regarding the mechanism underlying NHR may serve as a foundation for the development of novel strategies for crop disease management and crop distribution. Soybeans are an important crop throughout the world because of their high plant protein and oil content. Growing a combination of different crops and species in one field can boost yield and suppress crop diseases. Maize/soybean intercropping is a common combination used in some countries to address issues of limited arable land and increasing food demand. In the maize/soybean intercropping system, maize is susceptible to infection by Bipolaris maydis, whereas soybeans present no detectable symptoms of disease. B. maydis does not have a soybean pathogen phenotype, nor is it related to any known soybean pathogens. In addition, it does not infect soybeans via touch interactions. A previous microscopy analysis of infected soybeans showed that successful callose deposition and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) production (S1 Fig) may be the first line of defense against B. maydis growth. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that soybean resistance to B. maydis is established via NHR, which is the most robust and durable forms of plant resistance in nature. It allows soybean plants to protect themselves against a wide variety of parasitic microorganisms. In the past few decades, several studies have confirmed the existence of NHR in plants. Unlike the well-studied host resistance conferred by plant resistance (R) genes, the molecular basis of NHR remains elusive. In this present study, the foundation of soybean NHR against B. maydis, a pathogen affecting a remotely related plant species, was characterized at the proteomic level. The availability of complete soybean genome sequences and recent developments in various sequencing technologies have allowed us to investigate the complex mechanisms underlying NHR in soybeans at the protein level. Plants respond to stresses via differential expression of sets of genes, which results in changes in protein levels. The proteome represents the global protein expression profile of a species at a given time and under a set of conditions. Proteomic analysis involves identifying proteins involved in stress responses, determining their functions, and identifying possible regulatory networks that can be used to interpret stress-responsive processes that occur in plants. In a previous study, although there were no visible symptoms in soybean leaves inoculated with B. maydis, microscopic observations showed that successful callose deposition and H2O2 production (S1 Fig) may be the immediate response of a plant to restrict the growth of B. maydis. Information on the molecular mechanism underlying this kind of robust and durable defense in whole soybean plants is currently limited. To better understand the mechanism of NHR in soybean, it is important to identify proteins that might be involved in the soybean response to exposure to B. maydis, determine the types of metabolic proteins involved in the NHR in soybeans, compare the findings of the present study and those of previous NHR investigations in plants, and determine whether any organelle was involved in the response to B. maydis. This present study addresses these issues and summarizes the metabolic processes involved in NHR in soybeans. The results may facilitate further our understanding of NHR in soybean plants.