Retinal levels of AQP4 in WT mice at PD17. (A) AQP4 mRNA, measured by qPCR, was significantly higher in OIR than in normoxic controls. Western blot and densitometric analysis (B) confirmed qPCR data. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 5, *P < 0.01 versus control. Unpaired Student's t‐test). Retinal levels of VEGF and HIF‐1α in WT and AQP4 KO mice at PD17. (A) VEGF mRNA, measured by qPCR, was significantly higher in OIR than in normoxic controls in both WT and AQP4 KO mice. In normoxic controls, VEGF mRNA did not differ between WT and AQP4 KO mice, while in OIR, VEGF mRNA was significantly lower in AQP4 KO than in WT mice. Western blot and densitometric analysis (B), as well as ELISA (C), confirmed qPCR data. (D) HIF‐1α levels, measured by Western blot and densitometric analysis, were significantly higher in OIR than in normoxic controls in both WT and AQP4 KO mice. In normoxic controls, HIF‐1α levels did not differ between WT and AQP4 KO mice, while in OIR, HIF‐1α levels were significantly higher in AQP4 KO than in WT mice. (E, F) The ratios between nuclear and cytosolic HIF‐1α levels were evaluated by Western blot (E) and densitometric analysis (F). In both WT and AQP4 KO mice, either controls or OIR, similar ratios between nuclear and cytosolic levels of HIF‐1α were measured. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 5, *P < 0.01 and **P < 0.001 versus respective control; §
P < 0.01 versus OIR WT. One‐way anova followed by Newman‐Keuls’ multiple comparison post‐test). White bars, control WT; grey bars, OIR WT; dashed bars, control AQP4 KO; black bars, OIR AQP4 KO; n, nuclear; c, cytosolic. Retinal levels of iNOS and NO in WT and AQP4 KO mice at PD17. As evaluated by Western blot and densitometric analysis (A), iNOS levels in OIR were significantly higher than in normoxic controls in WT but not in AQP4 KO mice. Consistently, as evaluated by the Griess method (B), NO production in OIR was significantly higher than in normoxic controls in WT but not in AQP4 KO mice. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 5,*P < 0.01 and **P < 0.001 versus respective control. One‐way anova followed by Newman‐Keuls’ multiple comparison post test). White bars, control WT; grey bars, OIR WT; dashed bars, control AQP4 KO; black bars, OIR AQP4 KO. Representative images of retinal flat mounts from WT and AQP4 KO mice at PD17. Retinal vessels were identified with fluorescein labelled isolectin B4. The vascular pattern of control retinas did not differ between WT (A) and AQP4 KO (C) mice. In OIR WT (B) and AQP4 KO (D) mice, a large avascular area could be seen in the central retina. In contrast to what was found in WT, AQP4 KO mice exhibited only rare neovascular tufts. Scale bar: 1 mm. The extent of both the avascular area (E) and the tuft area (F) were quantitatively evaluated in WT and AQP4 KO mice. AQP4 deletion did not affect the extent of the avascular area while it reduced the neovascular tuft area. Data are presented as means ± S.E.M. (n = 6, *P < 0.001 versus WT. Unpaired Student's t‐test). ERG responses in WT and AQP4 KO mice at PD17. (A) Representative ERG waveforms in both WT and AQP4 KO mice, either controls or OIR, recorded at light intensities of ‐1, 0 and 1 log cd‐s/m2. (B–D) a‐wave, b‐wave and SOP amplitudes in normoxic controls (white symbols) and OIR (black symbols) either WT (squares) or AQP4 KO (circles) at increasing light intensities. AQP4 deletion prevented the OIR‐induced reduction in a‐waves, b‐waves and SOPs that characterize OIR. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6 mice, P < 0.001 versus OIR WT. Two‐way anova followed by Bonferroni's post‐test). CpG site methylation analysis in the VEGF promoter in WT and AQP4 KO mice at PD17. (A) CpG sites are highlighted by vertical red lines. The position of the HBS is reported and the relative CpG site underlined. Methylation status of 21 CpG sites in four DNA region (boxed) of the VEGF promoter was determined by direct PCR bisulphite sequencing. All four CpG sites were only found to be methylated in the region containing the HBS. (B) Representative chromatograms of PCR bisulphite sequencing of the boxed DNA region reported in panel A. C/T double peaks in the CpG sites in the DNA region containing the HBS (CpG sites 1‐4) are shown. Normoxic controls, either WT or AQP4 KO, were characterized by the complete methylation of CpG3 (blue peak, arrow). In OIR, either WT or AQP4 KO, blue peaks (5 methyl CpG, arrows) were increased in a similar fashion. The analysis was performed on four independent samples for each experimental condition, each containing one retina. Analysis of VEGF mRNA levels, CpG methylation status and physical interaction between HIF‐1α and HBS. (A) VEGF mRNA levels were evaluated by qPCR at different times after hypoxia. At 1 hr, hypoxic levels of VEGF mRNA were significantly lower than in normoxia to then increase at 6 hrs with a peak at 12 hrs followed by a drastic reduction at PD17. The absence of AQP4 reduced VEGF mRNA levels already after 12 hrs of hypoxia. (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 versus respective control; §
P < 0.001 versus WT; anova). (B) Representative chromatograms of PCR bisulphite sequencing and relative C/T double peaks in the CpG sites of the HBS. Blue peaks (5 methyl CpG, arrows) indicate that in normoxic controls, the CpG site was methylated in retinas of both WT and AQP4 KO mice, while in OIR, the CpG site became demethylated in WT, but not in AQP4 KO mice. (C) The COBRA analysis confirmed that the methylation frequency of the CpG site in the HBS was significantly higher in AQP4 KO than in WT mice (*P < 0.05 versus WT, unpaired Student's t‐test). (D) The cloning and the sequencing of bisulphite‐treated DNA relative to four CpG sites (CpG1‐4) showed that the methylation frequency of the CpG1 site in the HBS was about twofold higher in AQP4 KO than in WT mice, similarly for CpG2. CpG3 was completely methylated while CpG4 was strongly demethylated, both in a similar fashion between WT and AQP4 KO mice. (E) HIF‐1α chromatin immunoprecipitation and HBS‐specific qPCR (ChIP‐qPCR) were performed on WT and AQP4 KO mice. In WT mice, the physical interaction between HIF‐1α and the HBS starts quickly and reaches a peak after 6 hrs, while in AQP4 KO mice, the interaction is always very low and appears to be insensitive to hypoxia (*P < 0.05 versus relative WT; §
P < 0.05 6 hrs versus 1 hr and 6 hrs versus PD17 in WT, anova). Schematic diagram depicting the methylation status of the HBS in the VEGF promoter in both WT and AQP4 KO mice, the HIF‐1 binding and the relative VEGF transactivation. In both WT and AQP4 KO mice under normoxia, HIF‐1α is degradated and no VEGF transactivation occurs. In WT mice HIF‐1α is stabilized, interacts with HIF‐1β and binds the demethylated HBS localized in the VEGF promoter. In AQP4 KO mice, despite high levels of HIF‐1α, the absence of HBS demethylation prevents the HIF‐1 binding and the relative VEGF transactivation. Our assumption is that the absence of AQP4 reduces HBS demethylation limiting the accessibility of HIF‐1 to the VEGF gene promoter, therefore reducing VEGF transcription and accumulation in response to hypoxia.