Introduction Aquaporins (AQPs) are integral membrane water channel proteins allowing water to flow through cell plasma membranes in response to osmotic and hydrostatic gradients 1. Among AQPs, AQP4 is the most abundant in brain and retina 2 and its role in maintaining water homoeostasis in the retina has been extensively studied 3. AQP4 has been localized to the Müller cell end feet, where it facilitates water flux at the glial–vascular interface 3, 4. AQP4 deletion results in a gliotic phenotype 5 although this phenotype does not result in altered retinal responses to light 6. There are several indications that AQP4 is overexpressed in experimental models of retinal diseases 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. In some of these models, AQP4 downregulation is generally associated with an amelioration of the pathological signs of the disease 10, 11, 16, although AQP4 silencing has been shown to worsen the pathological signs of diabetic retinopathy 9. These observations indicate that a possible role of AQP4 in retinal diseases deserves attention. Major diseases of the retina are those characterized by neovessel growth resulting from the accumulation of several proangiogenic and inflammatory factors in response to hypoxia among which VEGF plays a major role 17. In this respect, anti‐VEGF therapies are currently approved to treat proliferative retinopathies such as neovascular age‐related macular degeneration 18. There are findings indicating the possibility of an interplay between AQP4 and VEGF or that common mechanisms may participate in regulating AQP4 and VEGF expression. Indeed, increased production of both AQP4 and VEGF has been reported in the rodent retina in response to hypoxia or hyperglycaemia 8, 11, 14, 16. In addition, VEGF administration has been found to induce AQP4 expression, whereas decreasing VEGF results in reduced retinal levels of AQP4 11, 16. There is also evidence of functional interactions between AQP4 and hypoxia‐inducible factor‐1 (HIF‐1), the major transcription factor regulating VEGF levels in response to hypoxia 19. For instance, in rat models of cerebral oedema, AQP4 and HIF‐1 are concomitantly upregulated by hypoxia and the inhibition of HIF‐1 prevents AQP4 upregulation 20, 21. The mouse model of oxygen induced retinopathy (OIR) represents a good model in which to study whether AQP4 may influence VEGF upregulation in response to hypoxia together with its downstream retinal damage 22. In this model, mice are exposed to hyperoxia from postnatal day (PD)7 to PD12 when, after returning to normoxia until PD17, they undergo to relative hypoxia that causes increased activity of HIF‐1 23. HIF‐1 is composed of a constitutively expressed β‐subunit (HIF‐1β) and an oxygen‐regulated α‐subunit (HIF‐1α). Under hypoxic conditions, HIF‐1α is stabilized reaching levels that are determined by a balance in positive and negative feedback mechanisms in which NO production plays an important role 24 through increased levels of the inducible form of NOS (iNOS) 24. After HIF‐1α stabilization, HIF‐1α and HIF‐1β translocate from the cytosol into the nucleus where they form a heterodimer that binds to the HBS localized to the hypoxia response element (HRE) in the promoter of HIF‐1 target genes 25. There is indication that in models of ocular neovascular diseases, the induction of VEGF occurs through the HRE in the VEGF gene promoter as HRE deletion prevents the hypoxia‐induced VEGF upregulation 26. In addition, it has been reported that hypoxia‐induced erythropoietin gene expression is dependent on the methylation status of HBS, when HBS is methylated, its binding with HIF‐1 is abolished 27. Finally, the methylation of CpG sites in the VEGF gene promoter results in reduced HIF‐1‐driven VEGF expression in the human placenta after preeclampsia and in tongue carcinoma cells in response to hypoxia 28, 29, thus suggesting that something similar might occur in in vivo models of hypoxia‐driven neovascular diseases of the retina. In this study, we investigate the role of AQP4 on hypoxia‐induced VEGF upregulation with the resulting neovessel growth and ERG dysfunction that characterize the OIR model. To this aim, retinal level of AQP4, VEGF, HIF‐1α, iNOS, NO as well as retinal neovascularization and function was determined in OIR models from WT and AQP4 KO mice. Furthermore, the methylation status of the HBS in the VEGF gene promoter and the physical interaction between HIF‐1α and the HBS was analysed in both strains under hypoxic conditions.