Materials and methods Animals AQP4 KO mice with a CD1 genetic background and age‐matched CD1 mice used as WT mice were kindly provided by Dr. Hu (Nanjing Medical University, China). Genotyping was performed on tail DNA using standard protocols. Mice were housed in a regulated environment (23 ± 1°C, 50 ± 5% humidity) with a 12‐hrs light/dark cycle (lights on at 8.00 a.m.), provided with food and water ad libitum, and supplied with environmental enrichment materials, such as toys and shelters. This study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health and adheres to the ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research. Procedures were carried in compliance with the Italian guidelines for animal care (DL 116/92) and the European Communities Council Directive (86/609/EEC) and were approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of the Universities of Pisa and Bari. All efforts were made to reduce both animal suffering and the number of animals used. Experiments were performed on a total of 92 mouse pups of both sexes, which were killed at PD17. In some experiments, mice at PD12 (16 animals) were also used. In all experiments, mice were anaesthetized with 4% halothane, killed by cervical dislocation and the eyes were enucleated. Mouse model of OIR In a typical model of OIR, litters of mice pups with their nursing mothers were exposed in an infant incubator to high oxygen concentration (75 ± 2%) between PD7 and PD12 before returning to room air between PD12 and PD17 30. Oxygen was checked twice daily with an oxygen analyzer (Pro‐Custom Elettronica, Milano, Italy). Individual litters were reared in either oxygen or room air (controls). All experiments were performed at the same time of the day to exclude possible circadian influences. The data were collected from both males and females and the results combined, as there was no apparent sex difference. Real‐time RT‐PCR After mice death, retinal tissues were rapidly dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until analysis. Total RNA was extracted (RNeasy Mini Kit; Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), purified, resuspended in RNase‐free water and quantified using a fluorometer (Qubit; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). First‐strand cDNA was generated from 1 μg of total RNA (QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit; Qiagen). In quantitative real‐time RT‐PCR (qPCR) experiments, five independent samples for each experimental condition, each containing two retinas from two different mice either WT or AQP4 KO, were used. qPCR experiments were performed using a kit (iQ Sybr Green Supermix; Bio‐Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), and primer sets were obtained from Primer Bank (AQP4 and VEGF) 31 or RTPrimerDB (Rpl13a) 32. The primer set for VEGF was designed to match the VEGF isoforms expressed in the retina. Forward and reverse primers were chosen to hybridize to unique regions of the appropriate gene sequence. Their sequences are shown in Table 1. Primer amplification efficiency (Opticon Monitor 3 software; Bio‐Rad Laboratories) was close to 100%. Target genes were run concurrently with Rpl13a, a stable housekeeping gene in the OIR model 33. Samples were compared using the relative threshold cycle (Ct Method) 34. The increase (x‐fold) was determined relative to a control after normalizing to Rpl13a. All reactions were run in triplicate. After statistical analysis, the data from the different experiments were plotted and averaged in the same graph. Western blot analysis In Western blot experiments, five independent samples for each experimental condition, each containing two retinas from two different mice either WT or AQP4 KO, were used. Retinal samples were processed as previously reported 34 obtaining supernatants containing cytosolic proteins (used to detect VEGF, HIF‐1α, iNOS and nitrite production) or membrane proteins (used to detect AQP4). Nuclear proteins were obtained using a commercially available kit (Nuclear Extraction Kit; Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Protein concentration was determined using a fluorometer (Qubit; Invitrogen). Equal amounts (30 μg) of proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Bio‐Rad Laboratories). β‐actin or histone H3 was used as loading controls. The blots were blocked in 3% skim milk for 1 hr at room temperature (RT) and then incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies, followed by 1‐hr incubation at RT with secondary antibodies. Key features of the antibodies are summarized in Table 2. Blots were developed with an enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The optical density of the bands was normalized to the level of β‐actin or histone H3 as specified. All experiments were run in duplicate. After statistical analysis, data from the different experiments were plotted and averaged on the same graph. Enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay VEGF levels were measured in cytosolic protein‐containing supernatants used in Western blot analysis using a commercially available kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). VEGF levels were evaluated spectrophotometrically (Microplate Reader 680 XR; Bio‐Rad Laboratories). Data were expressed as picogram VEGF/mg protein. All experiments were run in duplicate. After statistical analysis, data from the different experiments were plotted and averaged in the same graph. Measurement of nitrite formation The production of nitrite that indirectly detects total NO amount (μM) was evaluated spectrophotometrically (Microplate Reader 680 XR; Bio‐Rad Laboratories) by a Griess reaction kit (Enzo Life Sciences, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA) in cytosolic protein‐containing supernatants used in Western blot analysis. All experiments were run in duplicate. After statistical analysis, data from the different experiments were plotted and averaged in the same graph. Immunohistochemistry and quantitative analysis The retinal vasculature was visualized by immunohistochemistry on retinal whole mounts in line with previous works 22. Briefly, the retinal whole mounts were freeze‐thawed and incubated overnight at 4°C in fluorescein labelled isolectin B4 (1:200; Vector Laboratories, Burlingmae, CA, USA). Retinal whole mounts were examined for changes in their vascular pattern with a microscope equipped with epifluorescence (Eclipse Ni‐E; Nikon, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Images of the retinal vasculature were acquired through a digital photocamera (DS‐Fi1c camera; Nikon) and processed using an image‐editing software (Adobe Photoshop; Adobe Systems, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA) to create whole retina montages in which the extent of the avascular area and the total area of pre‐retinal neovascular tufts were measured according to previous quantification studies 34. For each experimental condition, quantitative data originated from six retinas from six different mice either WT or AQP4 KO. Electroretinography Retinal function was examined with scotopic full‐field ERG as previously reported 35. After dark‐adaptation overnight, ERG responses were recorded from both eyes together using silver/silver chloride ring electrodes inserted under the lower eyelids, forehead reference electrode, and ground electrode in the tail. Pupils were fully dilated using 0.5% atropine. The cornea was intermittently irrigated with saline solution to maintain the baseline recording. Body temperature was maintained at 38°C by a heating pad. Mixed (rod and cone) responses were evoked by flashes of different light intensities ranging from −3.4 to 1 log cd‐s/m2 generated through a Ganzfeld stimulator (Biomedica Mangoni, Pisa, Italy). The electrodes were connected to a two‐channel amplifier. Signals were amplified at 1000 gain and bandpass filtered between 0.2 and 500 Hz before being digitized at 5 kHz rate with a data acquisition device (Biomedica Mangoni). The ERG waveforms were examined primarily for amplitude information, and the data (pooled and reported as mean amplitudes ± S.E.M. in μV) were graphed to determine any gross changes in the intensity‐response function for that eye. Intensity‐response functions of the b‐wave were fit to a modified Naka‐Rushton function 36 V(I) = V0 + (Vmax·In)/(In + kn). In this equation, V is the amplitude of the b‐wave (in μV), I is the stimulus intensity (in log cd‐s/m2), V0 is the non‐zero baseline effect, Vmax is the saturated amplitude of the b‐wave (in μV), k is the stimulus intensity that evokes a b‐wave of half‐maximum amplitude (in log cd‐s/m2), n, which was constrained to unity, is a dimensionless constant controlling the slope of the function and represents the degree of heterogeneity of retinal sensitivity. To demonstrate oscillatory potentials (OPs), ERG responses were digitally filtered with bandpass filter between 65 and 300 Hz to eliminate the a‐ and b‐wave interference and to avoid the 60 Hz line noise. Of the five OPs that can generally be isolated from the mouse ERG, only OP2, OP3 and OP4 were analysed as OP1, and OP5 could not be accurately measured at PD17 37. For each OP, the trough‐to‐peak amplitude was measured and the amplitudes of each wavelet were added to create the sum OPs (SOPs = OP2 + OP3 + OP4; 38). Mean amplitudes of ERG responses were plotted as a function of increasing light intensities. For each experimental condition, ERG analysis was performed on six mice either WT or AQP4 KO. Analysis of DNA methylation For each experimental condition, genomic DNA was extracted from the retinas of four mice either WT or AQP4 KO mice, killed at PD12 or PD17, using a kit (DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit; Qiagen). Bisulphite reaction was performed (EpiTect Bisulfite Kit; Qiagen) to deaminate unmethylated cytosine to produce uracil in DNA. Purified bisulphite‐treated DNA was quantified using a spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). To search for CpG sites, the promoter of mouse VEGF (GenBank: U41383.1) was analysed by MethPrimer 39. The online available ZymoResearch Software (http://www.zymoresearch.com/tools/bisulfite-primer-seeker) was used to design primers for bisulphite sequencing. Their sequences are shown in Table 1. Fifty nanogram of bisulphite treated and purified DNA was PCR amplified using these primers and High Fidelity Taq DNA Polymerase (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). PCR products were analysed by 2% agarose gel, and amplicons were eluted by QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) and sequenced. FinchTV version 1.5.0 (free program from Geospiza, inc.) was used to analyse sequences and to detect double peaks (C/T). All unmethylated cytosines (C) were sequenced as thymine (T) and the presence of a C‐peak indicated the presence of 5mC in the genome. The presence of both C‐ and T‐peaks indicated partial methylation, and the height of C peaks was proportional to methylation frequency. The methylation frequency of the CpG site in the HBS was quantified in retinas at PD12. The Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) of the HBS was performed as reported previously 40. Briefly, 300 ng of PCR products containing the HBS was digested overnight at 37°C with HPYcH4IV restriction enzyme (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA), which is selective for methylated HBS. Restriction fragments were analysed by 2.5% agarose gel, calculating the % of methylated sequences with ImageJ software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/; provided in the public domain by the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Methylation frequencies of the CpG1 site (inside the HBS) and three CpG sites (CpG2, 3 and 4) proximal to the HBS were measured by the cloning and sequencing approach, performed as follows. Eight post‐bisulphite PCR products were equimolar pooled (four WT and four AQP4 KO) and cloned into pcR2.1 Topo‐TA vector using Top10 competent cells (Life Technologies). Independent clones were fully sequenced and aligned to reveal C (methylated C in genome) or T (demethylated C in genome) in the CpG1 of the HBS (TACGTGGG) and in CpG2‐4 in the same PCR product. HIF‐1α‐specific chromatin immunoprecipitation and HBS‐specific qPCR (ChIP‐qPCR) Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) ChIP was performed using the MAGnify Chromatin Immunoprecipitation System kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Life Thechnologies) with significant modification relative to the amount of starting material and chromatin fragmentation conditions. Each sample was composed of two retinas from the same mouse. Retinas were explanted at PD12 after 1 and 6 hrs of hypoxia and at PD17, immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until the chromatin preparation. Samples were thawed on ice and homogenized with a sterile 1‐ml syringe and a 1.5‐inch 20G needle in 75 μl of ice‐cold D‐PBS. Sixty microlitre of room temperature D‐PBS was added to the homogenized tissue off the ice. To fix the samples and crosslink the chromatin, 4 μl of 37% formaldehyde was added and samples were incubated for 10 min. at RT, swirling the tube every 2 min. The crosslink was quenched with 17 μl of 1.25 M glycine for 5 min. at RT, and cells were harvested by centrifugation (5000× g for 3 min. at 4°C), washed twice with 150 μl of ice‐cold D‐PBS. The pellet was extracted on ice with 80 μl of lysis buffer and protease inhibitor provided in the kit. Chromatin shearing was performed with Vibra‐Cell Sonics VC‐130 for 10 cycles on ice (20 sec. of sonication at 25% amplitude followed by 20 sec. rest on ice) to obtain an average smear of 1 Kbp. Chromatin shearing was checked by agarose gel electrophoresis. Immunoprecipitation was performed using 10 μl of Dynabeads Protein A/G, 1 μl of rabbit polyclonal Anti‐HIF‐1α ChIP Grade antibody (ab2185; Abcam) or control rabbit IgG provided in the kit and 15 μl of sheared chromatin with 10 r.p.m. rotation at 4°C over night. DNA from 1.5 μl of input chromatin (10% of immunoprecipitated chromatin) was purified and used in the subsequent qPCR as input sample. For each time‐point, the chromatin of 3 WT and 3 AQP4 KO mice was individually immunoprecipitated. HBS specific qPCR Real‐Time qPCR was performed using Power‐UP SybrGreen and the StepOne system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Life Thechnologies). Two microlitre of eluted DNA, from HIF‐1α ChIP and control IgG ChIP, and 2 μl of input DNA, were amplified using primers mapping upstream and downstream of the HBS in the mouse VEGF promoter (see Table 1). The percentage input method was used to measure the HIF‐1α binding to the HBS. Briefly, starting from the Ct obtained from amplification plots relative to the input, to the control IgG ChIP and to the HIF‐1α ChIP, the IgG‐normalized input percentage was calculated (input percentage relative to HIF‐1α ChIP—input percentage relative to IgG ChIP). The results were expressed as means ± S.E.M. of IgG‐normalized input percentage. Statistics All data were analysed by the Shapiro–Wilk test to verify their normal distribution. Statistical significance was evaluated using unpaired Student's t‐test, One‐way analysis of variance (anova) followed by Newman–Keuls’ multiple comparison post‐test, or two‐way anova followed by Bonferroni's post‐test, as appropriate. The results were expressed as means ± S.E.M. of the indicated n values. Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA) was used to analyse data. Differences with P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.