Discussion This is the first demonstration that hypoxia induces HBS demethylation at level of VEGF promoter in vivo and that AQP4 deletion prevents this process. The lack of HBS demethylation would limit the accessibility of HIF‐1 to the VEGF gene promoter thus reducing the hypoxia‐induced VEGF gene transactivation and VEGF accumulation in response to hypoxia therefore preventing the retinal damage including pathological neovascularization and retinal dysfunction. Mechanisms underlying lower VEGF accumulation in AQP4 KO mice: HIF‐1α accumulation and translocation As shown by the present results, in AQP4 KO mice, hypoxic conditions are coupled to lower retinal levels of VEGF as compared to WT mice thus indicating that AQP4 may have a detrimental role during ischaemic/hypoxic conditions of the retina. This is in line with the fact that AQP4 is overexpressed in the OIR model as demonstrated here, a finding which is consistent with previous results in rodent models of neovascular pathologies of the retina 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16 and with the observation that AQP4 deletion ameliorates the pathological signs of retinal ischaemia 6. In search for mechanisms underlying this reduced VEGF levels in response to hypoxia, we have first checked whether HIF‐1α levels may be in parallel reduced by the absence of AQP4 as VEGF and HIF‐1α levels are strictly interconnected 43. However, HIF‐1α is instead dramatically increased in response to hypoxia in AQP4 KO mice. One possibility to explain HIF‐1α overproduction in the absence of AQP4 would be to postulate that AQP4 deletion prevents NO accumulation in response to hypoxia, an event that is known to limit HIF‐1α stabilization in hypoxic conditions 24. As shown here, in the absence of AQP4, neither iNOS expression nor NO production is influenced by hypoxia thus explaining why HIF‐1α stabilization is out of control in the absence of NO overproduction. On the other hand, the lack of NO upregulation may directly cause reduced VEGF levels as NO is known to induce VEGF expression 44. In the OIR model, for instance, inhibition of iNOS has been observed to reduce retinal VEGF 45, 46. Conversely, VEGF may act as an upstream regulator of iNOS 47, thus indicating that reduced VEGF levels may cause reduced iNOS expression in response to hypoxia. Thus, the complex relationship between iNOS and VEGF is characterized by reciprocal interactions in which AQP4 may play a role, although its exact contribution and the mechanisms involved remain to be investigated. An additional possibility to explain the reduced VEGF accumulation in response to hypoxia is that the translocation of HIF‐1α from the cytosol to the nucleus would be impaired in the absence of AQP4, thus limiting the availability of HIF‐1 to the HBS in the VEGF gene promoter and reducing HIF‐1 transcriptional activity. In this respect, proteins such as HIF hydroxylases may sequester HIF‐1α into the cytoplasm thus preventing its nuclear migration and reducing HIF‐1 transcriptional activity 48. This possibility, however, has been denied by the fact that the ratio between nuclear and cytoplasmic levels of HIF‐1α is not influenced by AQP4 deletion although in the presence of a reduced HIF‐1 transcriptional activity. Mechanisms underlying lower VEGF accumulation in AQP4 KO mice: HBS demethylation and HIF‐1α binding It is known that hypoxia induces CpG demethylation at the level of promoters of hypoxia‐regulated genes 49, 50 thus allowing the binding of transcription factors and gene transcription. For instance, HBS demethylation is a mandatory process to allow HIF‐1‐dependent erythropoietin gene expression 27. Little is known about the kinetic of CpG demethylation in the HBS and about the kinetic of the interaction with HIF‐1. Results in human neuroblastoma cells have demonstrated that the HBS in the VEGF promoter is demethylated after 24 hrs of hypoxia and that VEGF mRNA increases at 16 hrs of hypoxia strictly dependent on the enzymes involved in CpG demethylation 50 supporting the hypothesis that during the hypoxic response, a rapid CpG demethylation occurs at the HBS and that there is a tight correlation between hypoxia‐induced CpG demethylation and VEGF transactivation. In this respect, recent findings in rat pulmonary artery endothelial cells indicate that HIF‐1α binds the HBS within 1 hr of hypoxia, with a peak after 3 hrs 42. This result suggests that CpG demethylation at the HBS level, a mandatory process for HIF‐1 binding 27, occurs quickly in hypoxic conditions. More generally, there are also indications that the interaction between the VEGF promoter and hypoxia‐activated transcription factors occurs rapidly during the hypoxic response. For instance, phosphorylated STAT‐3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, a transcription factor participating to hypoxia‐mediated VEGF transactivation) binds to the VEGF promoter after 30 min. of hypoxia in retinal endothelial cells 51. However, little is known about these mechanisms in the hypoxic retina. There is evidence that HIF‐1α is regulated over time after the beginning of hypoxia with a peak of stabilization occurring at 2 hrs 23. In addition, VEGF mRNA is constitutively expressed in the inner nuclear layer where it drastically increases 6 hrs after the onset of hypoxia and remains elevated for several days 23. This is also confirmed here by the demonstration that maximal accumulation of VEGF mRNA takes places between 6 and 12 hrs of hypoxia. As also shown by the present results, 1 hr of hypoxia induces HBS demethylation at the level of the VEGF promoter in line with the time course of retinal accumulation of HIF‐1α and VEGF mRNA reported during the hypoxic response 23. The additional evidence from the present results that AQP4 deletion drastically reduces VEGF expression already after 12 hrs of hypoxia is indicative of the fact that mechanisms of VEGF transactivation might be influenced by AQP4 absence already after the first hours of hypoxia. In this line, we found that AQP4 deletion prevents the HBS demethylation process. To provide direct evidence supporting the hypothesis that the observed change in the HBS methylation status may affect HIF‐1 accessibility to the VEGF promoter, therefore influencing retinal levels of VEGF, we checked the physical interaction between HIF‐1α and the HBS in the VEGF promoter. We show here for the first time in hypoxic retina that a physical interaction between HIF‐1α and the HBS occurs in the first hours of hypoxia and that this interaction is strongly affected by AQP4. The schematic diagram in Figure 8 shows the hypothetical sequence of events in normoxia and hypoxia in WT and AQP4 KO mice. We suggest that the absence of AQP4 reduces HBS demethylation limiting the accessibility of HIF‐1 to the VEGF gene promoter therefore reducing VEGF transcription and accumulation in response to hypoxia. As a consequence, neovascular tuft formation and ERG dysfunction, events downstream to VEGF upregulation in response to hypoxia, are prevented despite the hypoxic insult. Taken together, the present results suggest a correlation between VEGF upregulation in response to hypoxia and HBS methylation status. AQP4 deletion would prevent VEGF upregulation presumably by interfering with hypoxia‐induced HBS demethylation process, thus reducing the physical interaction between HIF‐1 and the HBS. The additional observation that, in the absence of AQP4, iNOS, another HIF‐1 target gene, is not influenced by hypoxia suggests reduced demethylation processes as more general mechanisms of gene silencing through which AQP4 deletion may lead to decreased expression of HIF‐1 target genes in hypoxic conditions. How AQP4 regulates the mechanistic associations among VEGF, HIF‐1α and HBS demethylation is difficult to postulate as the mechanisms underlying the control of HBS demethylation process are still largely unknown 52. In this respect, understanding how a water channel may influence a site‐specific and hypoxia‐induced demethylation process will require further work and the use of different experimental models to exclude the possibility of off target effects due to the lack of AQP4 gene. In conclusion, although with the difficulty of explaining the mechanistic relationships between AQP4 and VEGF and in the presence of mostly descriptive results, the present work lays the ground for future investigations for clarifying these issues.