The 13 kb non-segmented negative-strand (NS) HMPV RNA genome encodes nine proteins. Following virus entry, N-RNA is released into the host-cell cytoplasm and serves as template for the viral polymerase to produce sub-genomic capped and polyadenylated viral mRNAs, and for genome replication through an anti-genome intermediate. A cap 1 structure is formed at the 5’ end of viral mRNAs by the capping and MTase domains of L. Structures are available for segmented NS virus polymerases such as influenza, which acquire a capped primer by “cap snatching”. For polymerases of the Mononegavirales order, which includes several major human pathogens, the structure of the rhabdovirus vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) L protein was determined first and a crystal structure of the MTase domain of HMPV-L was reported. Co-expressing the L and P proteins (Fig. 1a, b and Extended Data Fig. 1a) from HMPV in Sf9 insect cells yielded a stoichiometric preparation suitable for functional and structural studies (Fig. 1c–e). A primer elongation assay demonstrated that LWT:P complexes had polymerase activity (Fig. 1c). LWT:P complexes were also tested for de novo RNA synthesis activity using a template consisting of a sequence from the 3’ end of the HMPV genome (“le14”). The major band detected in reactions containing LWT:P, all four NTPs and radiolabeled UTP as a tracer was 12 nt in length, consistent with position 3C being the dominant initiation site (Fig. 1d). This product was not detectable in a reaction mix containing only radiolabeled UTP and no other NTPs, or in a reaction containing a chain terminator, confirming that it was the product of de novo initiation at the promoter. LD745A:P, in which Asp745 from the conserved “GDNQ” motif C was mutated to Ala, was devoid of polymerase activity, ruling out the possibility that a contaminating polymerase was responsible for the observed activity. Thus, recombinant L:P is active for RNA polymerization (Fig. 1c–d and Extended Data Fig. 2). We determined the structure of the L:P complex to a resolution of 3.7 Å using cryo-EM (Fig. 1e, Supplementary Video 1, Extended Data Fig. 1). The final 3D reconstruction (Extended Data Fig. 3) allowed us to build an atomic model for residues 8 to 1380 of L and for the bound P tetramer (Fig. 1f–g, Extended Data Fig. 3–5). Residues 1381 to the C-terminus are not visible, suggesting flexibility of the peripheral appendage comprising CR-VI+. A comparison of HMPV-L with VSV-L3 returns an r.m.s.d. of 2.8 Å, illustrating the preservation of the core L structure during Mononegavirales evolution (Supplementary Fig. 2). This similarity extends to the N-terminal subdomain (NTD) of VSV-L, which is essential for viral transcription (Extended Data Fig. 6). The RdRp folds into the canonical fingers-palm-thumb subdomains observed in many RNA polymerase structures (Fig. 2a). Nucleoside inhibitors have been developed targeting RSV and HMPV RdRp activity. The 5’ triphosphate metabolites of ALS-8176/ALS8112 inhibit HMPV and RSV in non-human primates with similar potency and resistant RSV mutants were sequenced. We mapped the locations of RSV-L resistance mutations to helix α29 of the present HMPV-L structure (Extended Data Fig. 7). As in VSV-L, the capping domain of HMPV-L (Fig. 2b), containing the “HR” catalytic motif has a large interface with the RdRp, accounting for the rigidity of the “doughnut”. Arg1264 is exposed to the solvent, due to the mobility of the C-terminal appendage. A feature shared by RdRps that do not need a polynucleotide primer to initiate polymerization, is a “priming loop” (Fig. 2c, d) that supports the initiating rNTP. In the influenza polymerase, a proline at the tip of a β-hairpin of PB1 plays a key role for replication initiation. In rhabdoviruses (VSV and rabies virus), the corresponding loop is in the capping domain and contains residues important both for terminal de novo initiation and for mRNA capping, with a Trp residue in the capping domain essential for de novo initiation, indicating it is the priming residue. In sequence alignments, a Tyr residue lies at a similar position in HMPV-L (Tyr1201) and RSV-L (Tyr1276), which could provide base-stacking interactions required for priming (Supplementary Fig. 2). We tested this possibility using the RSV polymerase, which initiates at positions 1 and 3 on its promoter. A Tyr1276Ala substitution did not hamper RSV initiation from either site, but Ala substitution of either Pro1261 or Trp1262, corresponding to Pro1186 and Trp1187 in HMPV-L in motif B’ of the capping domain (Fig. 2c), inhibited an early stage of RNA synthesis within the promoter region (Fig. 2e, f), suggesting that either this Pro or Trp residue might be responsible for priming de novo RNA synthesis. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that the N-terminal region of the loop plays a structural role not directly related to HMPV de novo initiation. In VSV-L, the priming loop largely occludes the central RNA binding cavity (Fig. 2d), precluding the formation of a long dsRNA duplex and indicating a pre-initiation conformation. The putative priming loop in our structure of HMPV-L retracts completely into a cavity in the capping domain, leaving ample space for several base-pairs of a primer-template dsRNA intermediate (Fig. 2b, d). Modeling an elongation complex in the HMPV L tunnel shows that an RNA duplex can indeed be accommodated in the central cavity (Fig. 3a–d). In the preinitiation state of VSV-L, the connector domain (CD) and MTase domain have a defined orientation with respect to the core, being locked in place by the addition of peptide 35–106 from the VSV-P protein. In HMPV-L, one linker region located approximately at residues 1381–1407 just upstream of the CD and another at residues 1596–1598 before the CR-VI+ domain (Fig. 1a), likely account for their flexibility. Mobility of the C-terminal domain, which has nucleoside 5’-triphosphatase, nucleoside-2’-O- and guanine-N MTase activities, might be necessary to approach the 5’ end of nascent mRNA for cap addition. Thus, it is possible that N-terminal residues of HMPV-P (which are disordered here) are a latch that keeps the appendage in a fixed orientation for initiation and releases it during RNA elongation. Clear density corresponding to a coiled coil of four helices that constitute the P oligomerization region allowed tracing of residues 169–266 and 171–236 for the two proximal P subunits P1 and P2 in close contact with L, and of residues 168–219 and 169–231 for the two distal P subunits P3 and P4 (Fig. 1f, g and Fig. 4a). Much of P appears to fold upon binding to L, as shown by the presence of several extended arms typical of large molecular assemblies such as ribosomes or viral particles (Fig. 1, Fig. 4b and Supplementary Video 2). A large molecular surface area (Extended Data Fig. 4) becomes buried in the interaction, mostly involving residues from P1 and P2, while P3 and P4 provide few interactions (Fig. 4a). Previous structural studies mapped the tetramerization and L-binding regions of P to the four parallel α-helices (spanning residues 171–193 of P) that could be visualized using X-ray crystallography. In contrast, the N-terminal M2–1 binding regions of P, and the C-terminal regions of P that bind to the RNP were found to be “intrinsically disordered” in the absence of their respective binding partners. While the tetramerization region of P appears as a rigid unit largely unaltered upon binding L, a disorder-to-order transition in the C-terminal regions of the two subunits proximal to L takes place upon binding: residues 194 to 213 of P1 fold into a β-hairpin, such that a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet is formed with residues 383–391 of the fingers subdomain of L (Fig. 4c). This β-hairpin is followed by a long tentacle-like structure composed of three consecutive α-helices that encircle the rear aperture, through which rNTPs gain access to the active site chamber (Fig. 3a). Residues at the C-terminus of the adjacent coiled-coil-forming helix (from P2) project in the opposite direction towards the capping domain (Fig. 4d) with residues 199–205 and 207–213 making two short α-helices and 215–236 forming an extended helical arm (Fig. 4a, d). Only residues Glu181 and Lys182 from P3 make contact with Lys422 and Leu424 from the finger subdomain of L and a single contact is seen between L and P4 (Fig. 4d). Finally, the helix-forming residues 215–236 of P2, together with two long and mobile helices- presumably belonging to residues 201–217 and 205–231 of P3 and P4 respectively form a three-helix bundle largely exposed to solvent. In agreement with the present observations, earlier studies suggested that residues downstream of the coiled-coil region tend to form helices and constitute a “molecular recognition element”. Phosphorylation by cellular kinases regulates the transcription modulation activity of VSV-P. Analysis of recombinant HMPV-P using tandem mass-spectrometry (Extended Data Fig. 8) showed that P residues targeted by phosphorylation are largely solvent-exposed and changes in phosphorylation should only affect contacts of P with the RNP and M2–1 protein, not complex formation with L (Fig. 4a). In the Mononegavirales, the genome forms a helical nucleocapsid, with RNA bound in a crevice between the two N proteins subdomains. P acts as a chaperone by preventing non-specific aggregation of the N protein in the presence of non-viral RNA, preserving a pool of monomeric RNA-free N protein (N0) for RNP assembly. The P-N0 interaction involves an α-helix from HMPV-P (residues 12–28) that inserts into a hydrophobic groove in the CTD of the N0 protein. Here the entire regions N-terminal to the coiled coil of the four P subunits, including the N-terminal α-helix (PNTD), are disordered. The tetrameric coiled-coil appears to be anchored to the L protein at a location such that these helices, at the tips of flexible polar linkers spanning residues 29–135, can bind and deliver N0 to the RNA exit tunnel for encapsidating nascent RNA (Fig. 4e). The amino-acid sequence 29–135 of P (Extended Data Fig. 9) bears physico-chemical properties expected of a linker that evolved to ensure the spatial search of nascent RNA exiting L, by N0 bound to PNTD. In the present structure, the C-terminal regions of P are in non-equivalent positions (Fig. 1f, g). These segments have been proposed to dislodge RNA from the RNP complex and feed it into the template tunnel (Fig. 4e). Their structural asymmetry probably reflects different roles for the C-terminal domains of each subunit: while the C-terminal end of subunit P2 approaches the RNA template entry tunnel (Fig. 3c) and is well placed to bind N-RNA, the corresponding end of P1 is too distant to play a similar role (Fig. 3a). Moreover, the N-terminus of L (residues 8–24) wraps around the template entry tunnel (Fig. 3c). Thus, in addition to the C-terminal helix of P2, the NTD of L could help displace N to allow naked RNA to feed into the template tunnel (Fig. 3c). In summary, the tetrameric phosphoprotein binds to the monomeric L and fulfills its various adaptor functions by adopting an asymmetric structure (Fig. 4e) through (i) “conformational switching”, whereby each of the four P subunits folds into a different structure, depending on its position in the molecular assembly (ii) spatially confining structurally important N- and C-terminal helical elements (PNTD and PCTD) to the free and RNA-bound N protein respectively, through long flexible regions tethered to the rigidly anchored coiled-coil (Fig. 4e). While this manuscript was under revision, the structure of RSV L:P was reported. RSV and HMPV L and P proteins have only 48% and 36% overall amino acid identity respectively, but the structures are similar (r.m.s.d. of 1.34 Å over 1501 residues). Moreover, the putative RSV-L priming loop retracts to a similar position as seen here for HMPV-L. In RSV, hydrophobic residues critical for L: P interactions (L216, L223 and L227 of RSV-P) have been shown to be critical for polymerase function. The corresponding region, residues 251–265, of subunit P1 of the HMPV phosphoprotein contains several residues that contact L (Fig. 4c). The overall conservation of interactions between L and P within the family Pneumoviridae, suggests the possibility of broad-spectrum inhibitors disrupting the L: P interface. We note that dimeric P proteins from rabies virus that interact with the C-terminal region of L clearly differ from tetrameric P proteins as for HMPV, that bind to the N-terminal part of L. Whether the mode of interactions between L and P observed here for HMPV and for RSV, is also found in more distant Mononegavirales viral families such as the Filoviridae must await further structural studies.