1. Introduction Diabetes is defined as a complex metabolic disorder that affects protein, carbohydrate and fat metabolism, all due to insulin insufficiency or insulin dysfunction. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), this disease affects more than 382 million people around the world. Hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia factors, increased in diabetes, are involved in the cardiovascular failures that frequently affect patients. Diabetes is considered a public health problem, affecting people in both developed and developing countries, with no difference of race. According to the diabetes country profiles, diabetes mellitus accounts for 4% of total deaths in Ecuador, and ranks sixth in the population’s death causes, followed by respiratory diseases. For this reason, it is a priority issue for public health that needs the attention of both the government and academy. Folk medicine is well recognized in Ecuador, where almost 80% of the population uses plants as their primary source for medical treatment. Several plants are successfully used as antidiabetics in traditional medicine, and the WHO has recommended the assessment of these plants and their product derivatives for their potential use as oral therapy. A scientific validation of medicinal plants is necessary in order to prove efficiency, potency and security. Although many plants have beneficial effects, they can also be toxic, especially in long treatments such as those required in antidiabetic therapies. One of the therapeutic approaches used to treat diabetes consists of the inhibition of enzymes, which can hydrolyze the polysaccharides and convert them into simple sugars. This type of enzyme, such as alpha-amylase, catalyzes the hydrolysis of the α-1-4-d-glycosidic linkage of glucose polymers such as starch. Αlpha-glucosidase acts by hydrolyzing disaccharides to glucose. Inhibitors of these enzymes can interrupt the absorption of glucose in the digestive tract, prolonging the carbohydrate digestion time and decreasing the rate of glucose absorption. As a consequence, the postprandial blood glucose level is lowered. For this reason, both alpha-amylase and alpha-glucosidase inhibitory assays have been extensively used to test drugs and plant extracts. Polygonaceae is a family characterized for the production of a large variety of secondary metabolites, many of which exhibit potential pharmacological activity, such as anthraquinones, naphthalenes, stilbenoids, steroids, glycosylated flavonoids, leucoanthocyanidins and phenolic acids, among others. Some species have been reported to have antidiabetic potential, such as Muehlenbeckia sagittifolia, Coccoloba uvifera, Rumex spp. and Rheum spp.. In Ecuador, this family accounts for nine genera and 42 species. The genus Muehlenbeckia is restricted to South America, Australia and New Zealand and includes ornamental and medicinal species. These species are frequently used to treat gastric ulcers, and are used as macerated leaves to treat kidney ailments and as infusions to relieve the pain of arthritis. Phytochemical studies for species belonging to this genus have been reported. Glycosylated flavonoids such as catechin and quercitrin, isolated from M. platyclada, have shown antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities. A series of anthraquinones such as emodin, physcion and emodin-8-β-d-idopyranoside, isolated from the leaves of M. hastulata, showed promising antioxidant activity measured by the DPPH method. Muehlenbeckia tamnifolia (Kunth) Meisn, known as Anku yuyu lutu yuyu, is used by indigenous communities in Ecuador to treat kidney diseases, in baths to relieve bone pain, as mouthwash for toothache and, in combination with other plants, to treat bumps and inflammation. It is also applied as a disinfectant and to treat purulent skin wounds. Previous chemical studies on the roots of M. tamnifolia showed the presence of anthraquinones such as chrysophanic acid and emodin. The aim of this work was to evaluate the inhibitory activities of different extracts and isolated compounds of M. tamnifolia on α-amylase and α-glucosidase.