5. Protocol 4: FLIM Techniques and Analysis Here, we outline the steps for imaging the caspase-3 reporter using FLIM in the various experimental environments discussed in Protocol 2. FLIM measures the lifetime of LSS-mOrange in the reporter, identifying cells undergoing apoptosis by a longer lifetime of this fluorescent protein.  5.1. Materials 2-photon upright imaging system with variable laser power and compatible 25× objective (Olympus FVE1000 MPE microscope and 25× NIR corrected objective, XLPLN25XWMP, NA = 1.05, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan or similar product) 80 MHz pulsed scanning laser (Spectra-Physics Mai Tai-Deep Sea or comparable product) 572/15 nm bandpass emission filter FLIM instrument with frequency domain analysis capabilities (FastFLIM, ISS, Champaign, IL, USA or comparable product) Vista Vision Software or similar product for data analysis (ISS, Champaign, IL, USA) 5.2. Methods Allow laser to stabilize at 820 nm by turning it on for at least 45 min before calibration. Perform FLIM system lifetime calibration as per the manufacturer’s instructions. We used a 4.1 ns fluorescein slide for lifetime calibration. Immerse objective in the sample (6-well plate, TRIM plate, or tumor) and focus on a region of interest. Follow protocols to image orthotopic mammary tumors as we have previously discussed. Using an 820 nm wavelength, excite the LSS-mOrange fluorescent protein. We found a 256 × 256-pixel image with a 100 μs dwell time over 15–30 frames allow for sufficient counts and accurate data. LSS-mOrange is a long stokes shift fluorescent protein and emits in the orange channel (572 nm). Acquire and measure fluorescence lifetime of molecules in the orange channel. Literature reports the known LSS-mOrange lifetime as 2.75 ± 0.07 ns. After imaging the samples of interest, open and analyze images with ISS VistaVision or similar processing software. Using the Multi-Image Phasor Analysis function, set the minimum threshold count to eliminate background data and the Gaussian smoothing operation to 3 to smooth acquired data while maintaining spatial accuracy. Use the phasor plot and ROI function to define the portion of pixels with an increased LSS-mOrange lifetime. Pseudocolor this population as red and the shorter lifetime pixels as yellow with another ROI. Cells displaying increased amounts of yellow or red indicate increased or decreased amounts of apoptosis, respectively. Detailed reports on fluorescence lifetime analysis using phasor plots have been previously published.