Discussion In the present study, we found that MLL1 was upregulated in the ischemic penumbra and OGD-treated primary cortical mixed cells, and its expression level in ischemic penumbra was positively correlated with its serum level and also positively correlated with the severity of IS. In vitro study revealed that OGD promoted the recruitment of MLL1 to the promoter region of ASK-1 and enhanced the activation of ASK-1/TNF-α-mediated apoptosis. In addition, our study also suggested that high MLL1 levels in the serum indicated higher mortality and a poorer functional outcome of IS patients within 24 months. Concerning the potential mechanism of IS development, it is still not fully clarified. IS can be caused by brain ischemia. The blockage of a brain artery accounts for ~80% of the IS cases (Adeoye et al.,). In the process of IS development, the cerebral tissue has two important and independent areas: the core of the infarct and the ischemic penumbra. The core of the infarct is defined as the severe hypoperfusion area where neurons directly affected by the lack of glucose and oxygen, and eventually die by necrosis, while the ischemic penumbra is the less hypoperfused area surrounding the core, where neuronal cells are still metabolically active within a certain period and—depending on circumstances—will either die or survive (Berta et al.,). Cell apoptosis in the ischemic penumbra may occur in hours or days, and this process is multifactorial and complex (Radak et al.,). Presently, local recanalization and systemic thrombolysis are the only therapeutic options to treat IS, with a short therapeutic window for 4.5 h after stroke onset, and only 20% of patients benefit from this treatment (Chamorro et al.,). Finding mechanisms of neuron apoptosis in ischemic penumbra is a key way to improve the prognosis of IS patients. Recently, aberrant epigenetic histone modification was found to be involved in neuron apoptosis. As an active histone modification, the H3K4me3 level had been proven to be upregulated in the promoter region of some specific genes during the neuronal apoptotic process (Yung et al.,). MLL1 is the main HMT that catalyzes the methylation of H3K4 site (Yang and Ernst,). MLL1 had drawn people’s attention because of its function in the development of mixed lineage leukemia (Cao et al.,). However, concerning MLL1 and IS, the related document is extremely limited. In the present study, for the first time, we explored the function of MLL1 in neuron apoptosis in ischemic penumbra. We found that MLL1 increased significantly in ischemic penumbra after IS onset, and the upregulated MLL1 was recruited to the promoter region of ASK-1 to catalyze H3K4me3 in this region and further promoted the expression of ASK-1 and enhanced the activation of ASK-1/TNF-α-mediated apoptosis. ASK-1 is a cytosolic protein, and TNF-α is an extracellular protein; these two proteins interacted indirectly based on their interactions with the tumor necrosis factor receptor type 1 (TNFR1; Han et al.,). TNFR1 is a transmembrane molecule. After the initiation of TNFR1, the TNFR1-associated death domain (TRADD) protein is shuttled from TNFR1 to the cytoplasm and then interacts with the Fas-associated via death domain (FADD) protein and caspase to generate apoptosis complex to amplify TNF-α-induced apoptosis (Micheau and Jürg,). MM102, a small-molecule inhibitor, was further used to investigate the function of MLL1. We built an in vitro model to estimate whether MM102 could cross the BBB. In vitro BBB models have been in use for decades and have been of great benefit in the process of investigating and understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying BBB establishment. However, there are still some differences between the in vitro model of BBB and the in vivo one (Czupalla et al.,). First, BMECs are known to dedifferentiate in vitro, and the characteristics of BMECs will gradually disappear with the extension of culture time; then, the function of these cells will be affected. Second, the in vivo BBB is composed of BMECs, astrocytes, and pericytes; however, the in vitro model we used in this study only consists of BMECs and astrocytes and that may cripple the barrier function of BBB. Third, the in vitro BBB models always rely on Transwell chambers for functional measurements, while BMECs behave differently according to their growth surface, so the different cultural materials may lead to different results. Due to these defects, the results should be explained cautiously. In our study, results of the in vitro study showed that MM102 could cross the BBB, and in vivo inhibition of MLL1 alleviated neurological damage caused by IS; these both suggest that MM102 is an effective molecule for IS treatment. Additionally, we observed that serum MLL1 level was positively correlated with that in ischemic penumbra from MCAO mouse, indicating the feasibility to detect MLL1 by minimally invasive means. Since serum MLL1 level was positively correlated with that in ischemic core and penumbra in MCAO mice, we speculated that MLL1 was released from the damaged neurocytes into the blood. MLL1 mRNA in the serum might also be from the damaged vessels, blood cells, and/or cells in other organs affected by the systemic inflammatory response (Anrather and Costantino,). What is more, we found that MLL1 expression showed a rapid increase within the primary 2 h after IS onset and remained a stable level within 2–48 h. This will promise us plenty of time to diagnose patients, and it also suggests that detecting MLL1 in IS patients is feasible and credible. To verify the prognostic value of MLL1, we followed up 220 patients, and the results revealed that high serum MLL1 level indicated higher mortality and a poorer functional outcome, and these results were consistent with the results that serum MLL1 level was positively correlated with NIHSS scores, infarct volume, and Hs-CRP level of IS patients. In conclusion, the current study explored the function of MLL1 in neuron apoptosis and found that MLL1 served as a proapoptosis factor in the ischemic penumbra. Besides, serum MLL1 level is an effective indicator to reflect disease severity and to indicate the prognosis of IS. These results may provide us the theoretical basis for a new therapeutic target for IS.