Computer-assisted discovery of oleacein biomimetics with anti-CSC activity. Schematic illustration of the computational framework coupled to laboratory-based phenotypic testing. The values in parentheses are similarity scores calculated with respect to parental oleacein. Binding modes of oleacein mimetics to mTOR. Left panels. Graphical representation of the binding modes of the computationally-predicted oleacein mimetics to the catalytic cavity of mTOR. The black, red, and purple arrows indicate the location of the aromatic rings in the binding modes #1, #2, and #3, respectively. Right panels. Graphical representation of the binding modes of parental oleacein and selected oleacein mimetics with anti-CSC activity (Figure 4, 5) to the catalytic cavity of mTOR. Binding modes of oleacein mimetics to DNMT.
Left panels. Graphical representation of the binding modes of the computationally-predicted oleacein mimetics to the catalytic site of DNMT. The black and red arrows indicate the location of the aromatic rings in the binding modes #1 and #2, respectively. Right panels. Graphical representation of the binding modes of parental oleacein and selected oleacein mimetics with anti-CSC activity (Figures 4 and 5) to the catalytic cavity of DNMT. Phenotypic screening of the anti-CSC activity of oleacein mimetics (I).
Left. Comparative analysis of IC50 values of the computationally-predicted oleacein mimetics in 2D monolayer cultures and 3D mammosphere systems. With 10 μmol/L as a cutoff, 4/16 compounds tested were more potent in 3D than in 2D and were selected as anti-CSC candidates; 1/16 compounds tested was equally potent in 3D and in 2D and was designated as cytotoxic. Right. CHEMBL structures of the computationally-predicted oleacein mimetics with anti-CSC (blue box) and cytotoxic (red box) activity. Phenotypic screening of the anti-CSC activity of oleacein mimetics (II).
Top panels. MTT reduction-based measurement of cell viability is expressed as percentage uptake (OD570) relative to untreated controls (=100% cell viability). Bottom panels. Representative microscope images (×2.5 magnification) of mammospheres formed by MDA-MB-436 cells growing in sphere medium for 6 days in the absence or presence of graded concentrations of oleacein mimetics. The number of mammospheres (>100 μm diameter) is expressed as means (columns) ± SD (bars). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.005, statistically significant differences from the untreated (control) group. Phenotypic screening of the anti-CSC activity of oleacein mimetics (III). (A) Changes in the number of ALDH+ cells in BT-474 and MDA-MB-436 populations cultured in the absence or presence of 11.1 μmol/L of CHEMBL1950046 and CHEMBL1632504. The results are expressed as percentages means (columns) ± SD (bars). *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.005, statistically significant differences from the untreated (control) group. (B) Left. A dose-response inhibition curve of ATP-dependent activity of mTOR kinase was created by plotting FRET signal of the Z´-LYTE Kinase assay as the function of CHEMBL1950046 and CHEMBL1632504 concentrations. Right. Dose-response curves of SAM-dependent methylation activity of DNMT3A were created by plotting radioisotope signals of the HotSpotSM assay as the function of CHEMBL1950046 and CHEMBL1632504 concentrations. (C) Molecular scaffolds of oleacein.