REFERENCES Olive oil and health: summary of the II international conference on olive oil and health consensus report, Jaén and Córdoba (Spain) 2008. Xenohormetic and anti-aging activity of secoiridoid polyphenols present in extra virgin olive oil: a new family of gerosuppressant agents. Olive oil and the hallmarks of aging. Phenolic compounds isolated from olive oil as nutraceutical tools for the prevention and management of cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Virgin olive oil and health: summary of the III international conference on virgin olive oil and health consensus report, JAEN (Spain) 2018. Biological relevance of extra virgin olive oil polyphenols metabolites. Oleuropein, a bioactive compound from Olea europaea L., as a potential preventive and therapeutic agent in non-communicable diseases. Health effects of phenolic compounds found in extra-virgin olive oil, by-products, and leaf of Olea europaea L. Structure-biological activity relationships of extra-virgin olive oil phenolic compounds: health properties and bioavailability. Extra virgin olive oil polyphenols: modulation of cellular pathways related to oxidant species and inflammation in aging. Computer-aided discovery of biological activity spectra for anti-aging and anti-cancer olive oil oleuropeins. One-step semisynthesis of oleacein and the determination as a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor. Effects of oleacein on high-fat diet-dependent steatosis, weight gain, and insulin resistance in mice. Oleocanthal and oleacein contribute to the in vitro therapeutic potential of extra virgin oil-derived extracts in non-melanoma skin cancer. Secoiridoids of olive and derivatives as potential coadjuvant drugs in cancer: a critical analysis of experimental studies. Hydroxytyrosol, tyrosol and derivatives and their potential effects on human health. Health-promoting properties of oleocanthal and oleacein: two secoiridoids from extra-virgin olive oil. Extra-virgin olive oil contains a metabolo-epigenetic inhibitor of cancer stem cells. Hydroxytyrosol: a natural compound with promising pharmacological activities. Chemical, physical and biotechnological approaches to the production of the potent antioxidant hydroxytyrosol. Hydroxytyrosol: emerging trends in potential therapeutic applications. Computational de-orphanization of the olive oil biophenol oleacein: discovery of new metabolic and epigenetic targets. Metabostemness: a new cancer hallmark. Metabolic reprogramming of stem cell epigenetics. Oncometabolic nuclear reprogramming of cancer stemness. Metabolism and epigenetics of pancreatic cancer stem cells. Metabolic dysregulations and epigenetics: a bidirectional interplay that drives tumor progression. The evolving metabolic landscape of chromatin biology and epigenetics. In vitro propagation and transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/progenitor cells. Survival of mammary stem cells in suspension culture: implications for stem cell biology and neoplasia. ALDH1 is a marker of normal and Malignant human mammary stem cells and a predictor of poor clinical outcome. HER2 regulates the mammary stem/progenitor cell population driving tumorigenesis and invasion. Mammosphere formation in breast carcinoma cell lines depends upon expression of e-cadherin. Spherical cancer models in tumor biology. Therapeutic implications of cellular heterogeneity and plasticity in breast cancer. Metformin inhibits RANKL and sensitizes cancer stem cells to denosumab. The LSD1 inhibitor iadademstat (ORY-1001) targets SOX2-driven breast cancer stem cells: a potential epigenetic therapy in luminal-B and HER2-positive breast cancer subtypes. Stem cell factor-based identification and functional properties of in vitro-selected subpopulations of Malignant mesothelioma cells. Inhibition of FAK kinase activity preferentially targets cancer stem cells. Novel antibody reagents for characterization of drug- and tumor microenvironment-induced changes in epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cells. ORY-1001, a potent and selective covalent KDM1A inhibitor, for the treatment of acute leukemia. Cancer stem cell-driven efficacy of trastuzumab (Herceptin): towards a reclassification of clinically HER2-positive breast carcinomas. Counting on natural products for drug design. Lipophilic hydroxytyrosyl esters. Antioxidant activity in lipid matrices and biological systems. Hydroxytyrosol lipophilic analogues: enzymatic synthesis, radical scavenging activity and DNA oxidative damage protection. Selective cytotoxic activity of new lipophilic hydroxytyrosol alkyl ether derivatives. Antiplatelet effect of new lipophilic hydroxytyrosol alkyl ether derivatives in human blood. Tyrosol and hydroxytyrosol derivatives as antitrypanosomal and antileishmanial agents. Hydroxytyrosol butyrate inhibits 6-OHDA-induced apoptosis through activation of the Nrf2/HO-1 axis in SH-SY5Y cells. The extra virgin olive oil phenolic oleacein is a dual substrate-inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase. Extra virgin olive oil contains a phenolic inhibitor of the histone demethylase LSD1/KDM1A. An olive oil phenolic is a new chemotype of mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) inhibitors. Massive screening yields novel and selective trypanosoma cruzi triosephosphate isomerase dimer-interface-irreversible inhibitors with anti-trypanosomal activity. Metformin directly targets the H3K27me3 demethylase KDM6A/UTX.