Materials and Methods Ethics Approval This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shandong Provincial ENT Hospital affiliated to Shandong University (Shandong, China). Written informed consent was obtained from subjects following the Declaration of Helsinki. Animal experiments were all approved by the Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Otology (Shandong, China). In vivo Inhibition of MLL1 CD-1 mice (25–30 g, males) were purchased from the Charles River Labs (Beijing, China) and were housed in the Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Otology (Shandong, China). MM102 (HY-12220A, MCE), a specific WDR5/MLL interaction inhibitor, can significantly inhibit the catalytic activity of MLL1 (Hacer et al.,). Before surgery, MM102 was given by tail intravenous injection (0.10, 0.25, 0.50 mg/kg, three times a day) for 3 days. MM102 was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Mouse injected with DMSO only was taken as the control. IS Model Establishment, Infarct Volume Measurement, Neurological Deficit Assessment, and Ischemic Penumbra Determination Mice were randomly divided into the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) group and the control group. Mice from the MCAO group were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg, i.p.) and fixed. The origin of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) was blocked by silicon-coated mono-filament nylon suture. The MCAO model was proved to be successful by the reduction in semicerebral blood flow shown by B-ultrasound detection. For mice from the control group, the same surgical procedure was performed except for the suture ligation of MCA. After the surgery, carprofen (5 mg/kg, three times a day) was given by subcutaneous injection for analgesia for 3 days. At 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, 24, 36, and 48 h after modeling, 40 μl tail vein blood of each mouse was collected. Then, mice were euthanized. Brain tissues were quickly removed and sliced into sections of 2-mm thickness. The slices were stained with 0.5% triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) solution (Sh-haling Biotechnology, China) to show the infarct lesion (pale area). Infarct volume (%) = V (infarct area)/V (homolateral hemisphere) × 100%. Neurological deficit score was assessed as previously described (Rogers et al.,) at 24 h after MCAO: (0) no neurological symptoms; (1) failure to extend right paw completely; (2) the strength of the right forelimb is noticeably reduced; (3) rotating and crawling towards the right side; and (4) unable to walk spontaneously. During the assessment, staffs were blind to the group information of each mouse. According to the prior report (Ashwal et al.,), the middle coronal brain section was used for determining the ischemic penumbra. First, we made a longitudinal cut from the lateral of a sagittal suture through the right hemisphere, then made a transverse diagonal cut at approximately the “2 o’clock” position to separate the core from the penumbra. The infarction core was located in the lateral caudoputamen and the adjacent ventrolateral cortex of frontal–parietal, while the penumbra area was located in medial caudatoputamen and adjacent dorsal medial cortex of frontal–parietal (Figure 1A). Cell Culture and Treatment The primary cortical mixed cells were obtained from mice gray matter. Briefly, the gray matter was collected and mechanically dissociated. Then, the tissues were digested by enzyme (0.55 mg collagenase per gram of initial brain tissue) at 37°C for 1 h. After centrifugation, cells were collected and cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Gibco, USA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, USA), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were placed in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. After 3 days incubation, oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD) was performed as described previously (Zhou et al.,). Briefly, DMEM without glucose (Gibco, USA) was used to culture cells; then, cells were placed in a hypoxic environment (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with 1% O2, 5% CO2, and 94% N2 for different times. At 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, 24, 36, and 48 h of OGD treatment, cells were collected and analyzed. Controls were cells maintained in normoxic conditions. Brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs) were isolated from the gray matter of mice according to the previous report (Rosas-Hernandez et al.,). Briefly, the gray matter was collected and underwent mechanical and enzymatic digestion (0.55 mg collagenase per gram of initial brain tissue) for dissociation. After undergoing dextran separation and Percoll separation, cells were seeded on collagen-coated culture plates and cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS for 3 days. The purity of BMECs was identified by immunostaining for factor VIII-related antigen/von Willebrand factor (vWF; Supplementary Figure S1A). Cerebral astrocytes were also obtained from neonatal mice according to the previous report (Schildge et al.,). Briefly, meninges were removed and cortical pieces mechanically dissociated in culture medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS). Dissociated cells were seeded into cell culture flasks. To obtain type 1 astrocytes, flasks with confluent cultures were shaken at 37°C overnight. Astrocytes were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS for 1 day. The purity of astrocytes was identified by immunostaining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; Supplementary Figure S1A). To construct in vitro model of the brain–blood barrier (BBB), we used a Transwell insert. Astrocytes (1.5 × 104 cells/cm2) were seeded on the bottom side of the insert and were let to adhere firmly for overnight. Then, BMECs (1.5 × 105 cells/cm2) were seeded in the upper side of the insert, while the primary cortical mixed cells were seeded in the plate under the insert (lower chamber; Supplementary Figure S1B). Two days after, MM102 (HY-12220A, MCE) was added to the upper chamber and incubated for 3 days. Then, the primary cortical mixed cells in the lower chamber were collected and analyzed. MM102 was dissolved in DMSO. Cells treated with DMSO only was taken as the control. Cell Transfection Small interfering (siRNA; Genechem, China) targeting MLL1 and ASK-1 was purchased and used to silence MLL1 and ASK-1 expressions in primary cortical mixed cells, and the nontargeting siRNA (Genechem, China) was used as the negative control (NC). MLL1 and ASK-1 overexpression vectors (pG/CMV/MLL1/IRES/EGFP; pG/CMV/ASK-1/IRES/mCherry) were constructed and purchased (VectorBuilder, China), and the empty vectors were used as NC. Briefly, cells were cultured in culture without FBS for 24 h; then, the transfection was performed using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. After transfection, cells were placed in a hypoxic environment for another 24 h. The sequence of siRNA was provided in Supplementary Table S1. Western Blot Analysis Cells were lysed with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysate buffer (Beyotime, China). The same amount of protein was separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel and then transferred to a polyvinyl difluoride (PVDF) membrane. After soaking in protein-free fast block buffer (Beyotime, China), the membrane was incubated overnight with one of the following antibodies at 4°C: anti-ASK-1 antibody (8662, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-pASK-1 antibody (3764, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-STRAP antibody (AP29336; One World Lab), anti-14-3-3 antibody (9636; Cell Signaling Technology), anticleaved caspase-3 antibody (ab2302, Abcam), anti-TNF-α antibody (ab1793, Abcam), anti-MLL1 antibody (ab32400, Abcam), anti-WDR5 antibody (ab178410, Abcam), and anti-tubulin antibody (ab6160, Abcam). Then, the secondary antibody was used to incubate the membrane at room temperature for 0.5 h. Finally, the membrane was observed by ECL Plus Kit (Beyotime, China) and quantified using the ImageJ program (National Institutes of Health, USA). Immunohistochemistry Immunostaining was performed on paraffin-embedded sections. After blocking with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA), tissues were incubated with the following antibodies overnight at 4°C: antibodies directed against MLL1 (ab32400, Abcam) and cleaved caspase-3 (9661S; Cell Signaling Technology) were used to detect the target proteins. All slides were visualized using DAB substrate (Beyotime, China) and quantified by H score. The H score was calculated using the following formula: H score = Pi (i), where i is the intensity of staining with a value of 1, 2, or 3 (weak, moderate, or strong, respectively) and Pi is the percentage of stained cells for each intensity, varying from 0 to 100%. Flow Cytometry Analysis Cell apoptosis was assessed after OGD for 24 h using Annexin V fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/apoptosis detection kit (Sigma, USA). Briefly, cells were resuspended and were incubated with 5 μl annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and 10 μl propidium iodide for 15 min in a dark room. Then, cells were analyzed using flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA). Data were analyzed using CellQuest (BD Biosciences, USA). Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was performed using SimpleChIP® Plus Sonication Chromatin IP Kit (56383, Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Briefly, 50 μg chromatin was immunoprecipitated using 2 μg anti-MLL1 antibody (ab272023, Abcam), or 2 μg anti-H3K4me3 antibody (9751, Cell Signaling Technology). Immunoprecipitation with 2 μg normal rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) was used as the NC. Then, DNA was purified and was detected by quantitative PCR (qPCR). The primers used were provided in Supplementary Table S1. Immunoprecipitation The lysates generated from mice brain tissues or primary cortical mixed cells were precleared with Protein G beads and followed by being incubated with 5 μg/ml anti-ASK-1 antibody (8662; Cell Signaling Technology) or anti-MLL1 antibody (ab32400, Abcam) overnight at 4°C. Then, Protein G beads were added and incubated for 2 h at 4°C. After that, beads were washed using lysis buffer for three times and were directly boiled in 1× Laemmli buffer. The coprecipitated proteins were further separated and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting analysis. Real-Time Quantitative PCR Total RNA was extracted from tissues or cells using Beyozol kit (Beyotime, China), and RNA concentration was determined by Nanodrop ND2000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Then, RNA was reversely transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using PrimeScriptTM RT Master Mix (Takara, Japan). MLL1 messenger RNA (mRNA) was detected by BioRad CFX96 (BioRad Inc., USA) using SYBR Green qPCR Mix (CWBIO, China). MLL1 expression was normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) using 2−ΔΔCt method. All the experiments were in triplicates. The sequence of primer was provided in Supplementary Table S1. Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed with 4% polyoxymethylene for 10 min at room temperature and then were incubated with 5% BSA for 0.5 h at 37°C. After that, anti-MLL1 (14197; Cell Signaling Technology) and anticleaved caspase-3 antibody (05–765; Millipore Sigma), anti-GFAP antibody (ab7260, Abcam), or anti-vWF antibody (ab11713, Abcam) were added and incubated with cells overnight at 4°C, followed by incubating with secondary antibody (BA1101, BA1032, BOSTER) for another 0.5 h at 37°C. 2-(4-Amidinophenyl)-6-indolecarbamidine dihydrochloride was added to indicate the nucleus. Finally, cells were observed under an inverted microscope (Olympus, Japan). Human Study Subjects Two hundred and twenty-three patients [148 men and 75 women; median age, 72.21; interquartile range (IQR), 63.32–82.54] diagnosed as IS between October 2015 and September 2019 at Shandong Provincial ENT Hospital affiliated to Shandong University (Shandong, China) were enrolled in this study. Patients were all diagnosed according to the results of magnetic resonance imaging and computed X-ray tomography. At admission, the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score, the infarct volume, and the high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (Hs-CRP) were all assessed. One hundred and fifty age and gender-matched controls (100 men and 50 women; median age, 71.98; IQR, 65.63–77.88) from the physical examination center were also collected. Blood samples of IS patients were collected immediately at the admission [within 2–12 h (n = 74), 12–24 h (n = 106), 24–36 h (n = 31), and 36–48 h (n = 12) from symptom onset]. Blood samples of controls were collected at the time of physical examination. Follow-Up and Endpoints After discharged from hospital, researchers followed patients up by telephone every half month for 24 months. The endpoint was the death within follow-up or patients quitting the study within 24 months. The modified Rankin Scale (mRS) of alive patients was obtained at 24 months after hospitalization at the outpatient department. An unfavorable functional outcome was defined as mRS scored more than 4 (Bonita and Beaglehole,). Statistical Analysis Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 20.0. For normally distributed data, results were shown as mean ± standard deviation (M ± SD), and for skewed data, results were presented as median (IQR). For differences between two groups (normally distributed variables), Student’s t-test was used, while one-way ANOVA was used for multiple groups. Categorical variables were analyzed by χ2 test. Correlations were analyzed using Pearson or Spearman correlation analysis. In this study, all experiments were repeated three times, and P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.