Materials and methods Virus isolation and preparation Avian and human influenza viruses were grown in 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs and MDCK cells, respectively. The allantoic fluids and culture supernatants were then harvested, pre-cleared by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 20 min, passed through 0.45 µm filters, and stored as seed viruses at −80 °C. Viral titers were assayed as hemagglutination units (HAU) by hemagglutination assays as described below. All experiments with live H5N1 viruses were performed in Biosafety Level 3 (BSL3) conditions at Osaka University (Japan), Tottori University (Japan), National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology (Viet Nam) and Airlangga University (Indonesia). Generation of viruses by reverse genetics Recombinant viruses were generated with a plasmid-based reverse genetics system in the genetic background of influenza virus A/duck/Egypt/D1Br/2007 (EG/D1), which is one of the parental Egyptian H5N1 strains, as previously described. Mutant HA genes were generated by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. Recombinant EG/D1 virus and an EG/D1 variant carrying an HA mutation were denoted here as rEG/D1 and rEG/D1mutation, respectively. Recombinant viruses were propagated by single passage in eggs. The HA genes of the virus stocks were sequenced to detect the possible emergence of revertants during amplification. All studies with recombinant DNAs were conducted at Osaka University under the applicable laws and approved by the Biological Safety Committee of the Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University (approval number 3439). Hemagglutination titration Stocks of avian and human influenza viruses were serially diluted with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and mixed with 0.5% turkey red blood cells (Nippon Biotest, Japan) and 0.75% guinea pig red blood cells (Nippon Biotest, Japan), respectively. Hemagglutination by avian and human influenza viruses was observed after incubation at room temperature for 30 min and 1 h, respectively, to determine their HAU titers. Virus binding assay Receptor binding specificity was analyzed by a solid-phase direct binding assay with sialylglycopolymers containing Sia linked to galactose through Siaα2,3-LacNAcβ-pAP or Siaα2,6LacNAcβ-pAP. A 1 µg/ml solution of each sialylglycopolymer (non-conjugated with colored latex) was prepared in PBS, and 100 µl of this solution was added to each well of 96-well microtiter plates (Polystyrene Universal-Bind Microplates, Corning, USA). The plates were then irradiated with 254 nm ultraviolet light for 10 min, and each well was washed three times with 250 µl PBS. Each well was blocked with 200 µl SuperBlock Blocking Buffer (Thermo Scientific, USA) at room temperature for 1 h. After washing with ice-cold PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST), a serial dilution of 256 HAU of an influenza virus in PBST was added to the wells, and the plates were incubated at 4 °C for 12 h. After five washes with ice-cold PBST, monoclonal antibody against influenza virus nucleoprotein, which is a structural protein of the viral particle, was added to each well, and the plates were incubated at 4 °C for 2 h. The wells were then washed five times with ice-cold PBST and incubated with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-immunoglobulin (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO, Nichirei, Japan) at 4 °C for 2 h. After washing five times with ice-cold PBST, 100 µl SureBlue Reserve Peroxidase Substrate (KPL, USA) was added to each well and, after incubation at room temperature for 10 min, absorbance at 630 nm (developed blue color) was measured. Assembly of strip test The test system in this study included an expansion solution, an antibody solution, and two test strips. The expansion solution was a mixture of surfactant agents: 0.2% Triton X-405, 1% Tween 20, and 50 μg DANA (N-acetyl-2.3-didehydro-2-deoxyneuraminic acid)/ml in Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.5). These surfactant concentrations were sufficient to inactivate influenza virus infectivity and sialidase activity. The antibody solution contained 0.12 mg biotinylated anti-HA antibody C179/ml. C179 is a monoclonal antibody against the antigenically conserved HA stem region, and has been reported to bind to a broad range of group 1 influenza HAs (H1, H2, H5, H6 and H9). A preliminary study showed that C179 reacted with all of the group 1 influenza HAs in this study, while monoclonal antibodies against the antigenically variable HA head region only reacted with some of these HAs (Table S1). C179 binding to the HA stem region has been reported to not interfere with the interaction between sialylglycans and the HA head region, which enabled its use in the strip test to detect sialylglycan–HA complexes. Each test strip consisted of four components assembled on a plastic backing: a sample pad, a sialylglycopolymer pad, a nitrocellulose (NC) membrane and an absorption pad ( Fig. 1A). The three pads were as follows: the sample pads were Rayon Nonwoven Fabric (Advantec), each 4 mm wide, 2 cm long and 0.24 mm thick; the sialylglycopolymer pads were glass fiber (Millipore Corporation), each 4 mm wide, 8 mm long and 0.43 mm thick; and the absorption pads were filter paper (Advantec), each 4 mm wide, 3.4 cm long and 1.35 mm thick. The NC membranes (Millipore Corporation) were 4 mm wide and 3 cm long, and the plastic backings were adhesive backing cards (Lohmann Technologies Corp.), each 4 mm wide and 7.6 cm long. A sialylglycopolymer pad was prepared by spraying it with either blue latex-conjugated α2,3 sialylglycopolymer or red latex-conjugated α2,6 sialylglycopolymer (denoted as an α2,3 Sia strip and an α2,6 Sia strip, respectively) and drying at room temperature. Our previous study showed that the latex-conjugated sialylglycopolymers are remarkably stable without any aggregation even in boiling water. An 0.4 μl sample of a 4 mg avidin/ml solution and a 0.4 μl sample of a 1 mg lectin/ml solution were dispensed on each NC membrane to form test and control lines, respectively, and the membrane was air-dried. The distance between test and control lines was about 7 mm. To assemble a test strip, an NC membrane was pasted onto the center of the plastic backing (using acrylic adhesive) and covered with the sialylglycopolymer pad at one end and the absorption pad at the other end. A sample pad was pasted onto the plastic backing at the top of the sialylglycopolymer pad. The NC membranes with attached pads were then cut into 4 mm wide test strips and stored desiccated at 4 °C. Test strip analysis Virus samples (30 µl) were mixed with 90 µl of expansion solution and 30 µl of antibody solution, and then incubated for 15 min to form virus–C179 complexes (Fig. 1A). Each mixture was then pipetted onto a test strip sample pad or, alternatively, a sample pad was immersed in the virus mixture. This allowed the mixture to migrate along the strip by capillary action. During migration through the sialylglycopolymer pad, the virus–C179 complex was able to form a complex with α2,3 Sia or α2,6 Sia depending on the virus HA receptor binding affinity. Principle of the subsequent reaction is mainly based on two types of interaction: avidin–biotin interaction and lectin–glycan interaction. As the virus–C179–sialylglycopolymer complex migrated along the test strip, it was captured at the test line by avidin–biotinylated C179 interaction. Accumulation of the trimeric complex resulted in visual blue and red test lines on the α2,3 Sia strips and α2,6 Sia strips, respectively. If a viral HA did not bind either sialyglycopolymer, there was no visible test line because the captured virus–C179 dimeric complex was colorless. Excess complexes and free sialylglycopolymers were captured at the control line by lectin–glycan interactions, resulting in visible blue and red control lines on the α2,3 Sia strips and α2,6 Sia strips, respectively. The results of this assay were observed by eye 15 min after deposition of the virus mixture onto the strips. The presence of double blue lines on the α2,3 Sia strip and double red lines on the α2,6 Sia strip indicated virus binding affinity to α2,3 Sia and α2,6 Sia, respectively. Only a blue control line on the α2,3 Sia strip and only a red control line on the α2,6 Sia strip indicated no binding affinity to α2,3 Sia and α2,6 Sia respectively, or that the amount of virus was below the limit of detection of this assay. If a control line did not appear within 15 min, the test was considered invalid. Thus, the complete assay took only 30 min. Identification of viral receptor binding specificity by the strip test In past influenza pandemics, mutant viruses with dual tropism for both α2,3 Sia and α2,6 Sia have emerged in the immediate early phase of an outbreak. These prototype viruses subsequently switched their receptor binding specificity from bird-type to human-type sialyglycans to become established pandemic viruses. Therefore, based on the patterns of the test lines on the α2,3 Sia and α2,6 Sia strips (Fig. 1B), viral receptor binding specificity was identified as follows: (i) only a blue test line indicated typical bird-type receptor specificity; (ii) both blue and red test lines indicated increased human-type receptor affinity with residual bird-type receptor affinity, denoting an interphyletic mutant virus; and (iii) only a red test line alone indicated a switch of viral receptor affinity from bird-type to human-type receptors, denoting either a novel virus with a high pandemic potential or a pandemic virus. Densitometric analysis Band intensities on test strips were quantified by ImageJ software, and the test line intensity was calculated by subtracting the background intensity from the test line intensity.