DISCUSSION The molecular frameworks of natural products can provide feasible and innovative templates for medicinal chemistry and drug discovery. But, despite the long tradition of natural product-inspired discovery of synthetic compounds, there has been little effort to utilize EVOO biophenols chemotypes as a springboard for lead discovery. Here, we carried out such a drug discovery approach to uncover new compounds capable of phenotypically mimicking the anti-CSC effects of the EVOO dihydroxy-phenol oleacein. We took advantage of modern bioinformatics approaches with the aim of identifying physicochemical mimetics of the anti-CSC behavior of EVOO-derived oleacein. First, the somewhat structurally complex framework of the dialdehydic form of decarboxymethyl elenolic acid linked to hydroxytyrosol (i.e., oleacein) was computationally captured in terms of molecules with oleacein-like physico-chemical profiles. Second, we in silico compared the binding modes of the top 20 computationally-predicted oleacein mimetics to the two molecular targets originally involved in the capacity of oleacein to specifically suppress the functional traits of tumor-initiating CSC (i.e., mTOR and DNMT). Third, we phenotypically explored the computationally-discovered oleacein biomimetics in terms of their anti-CSC activity. Fourth, we evaluated the structure-mTOR/DNMT bioactivity relationship of the most promising oleacein-mimetic candidates. By doing so, four oleacein mimetics, namely N’-[4-nitro-2-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]propane-1,3-diamine, (E)-N-allyl-2-((5-nitrofuran-2-yl)methylene)hydrazinecarbothioamide, N-(4-nitrobenzyl)ethenesulfonamide, and 3,4-dihydroxyphenethyl butyrate (a.k.a. hydroxytyrosol butyrate), fulfilled the first phenotypic endpoint of the selection criteria, which was the specific suppression of the 3D mammosphere forming capability of CSC in the low micromolar range without highly significant cytotoxic effects against differentiated cancer cells growing in 2D cultures in the same range of concentrations. Moreover, non-cytotoxic concentrations of the oleacein mimetics hydroxytyrosol butyrate and (E)-N-allyl-2-((5-nitrofuran-2-yl)methylene)hydrazinecarbothioamide efficiently suppressed the population of ALDH1+ epithelial-like proliferating CSC, a second phenotypic endpoint of the selection criteria for anti-CSC candidates. The fact that the oleacein mimetics-responsive phenotypes were exclusively manifested under 3D stem cell culture conditions along with their capacity to specifically and potently suppress (>90%) ALDH1+ CSC-like cellular states irrespective of the mutational landscape of the cancer cell population strongly suggested that their mechanism of action targets the biological functioning of cancer stemness per se. Hydroxytyrosol butyrate is a chemically-modified (alkyl ester) lipophilic version of hydroxytyrosol that is more stable than parental hydroxytyrosol under biological conditions. The fact that the inclusion of a short-medium lipophilic chain in the hydroxytyrosol molecule sufficed to recapitulate, at least in part, both the anti-CSC behavior and the anti-mTOR/DNMT inhibitory activity of the parental oleacein highlights the functional relevance of the dihydroxybenzene moiety within the phenolic part of oleacein, a scaffold that seems to be a crucial mediator of the metabolo-epigenetic modulatory effects of oleacein (e.g., COMT, IDH1, LSD1) via formation of stacking interactions, coordination with metal ions, and/or establishment of hydrophobic and/or hydrogen bond interactions through the hydroxyl groups or the aromatic ring (Figure 6C). The second oleacein scaffold, which comprises the secoiridoid dialdehyde part, might be involved in the stabilization of oleacein via hydrophobic interactions within the binding pocket of the targeted proteins. Accordingly, although hydroxytyrosol butyrate preserved the original double occupancy of oleacein within the catalytic sites of mTOR and DNMT, the sole dihydroxybenzene moiety does not suffice to fully preserve the low-micromolar biological activity of oleacein against mTOR and DNMT enzymatic activities. (E)-N-allyl-2-((5-nitrofuran-2-yl)methylene)hydrazinecarbothioamide, originally described as an inhibitor of the Trypanosoma cruzi triosephosphate isomerase, lacked the original binding sites of oleacein to mTOR and DNMT, thereby fully losing the original ability of oleacein to operate as a dual mTOR/DNMT inhibitor. (E)-N-allyl-2-((5-nitrofuran-2-yl)methylene)hydrazinecarbothioamide, however, appeared to operate as an optimized mimetic of oleacein capable of exhibiting a very promising and potent activity against ALDH1-positive breast CSC. These findings can be consistent with the notion that preservation of the original binding mode of oleacein to mTOR and DNMT is an obligatory requirement for a dual mTOR/DNMT inhibitory activity of hydroxytyrosol-related oleacein mimetics (e.g., hydroxytyrosol butyrate) with anti-CSC activity; for hydroxytyrosol-unrelated oleacein mimetics (e.g., (E)-N-allyl-2-((5-nitrofuran-2-yl)methylene)hydrazinecarbothioamide), however, the absence of a dual mTOR/DNMT inhibitory activity is dispensable for an efficient suppression of the ALDH+-CSC functional phenotype. We provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first evidence that the pharma-nutritional properties of oleacein that elicit its functioning as an anti-CSC compound can be phenocopied through the use of mimetics that capture its physico-chemical properties. Although we acknowledge that further studies are needed to validate the ability of oleacein mimetics to functionally deplete tumor-initiating CSC-like states in vivo and the mechanisms underlying their mode of action, it is reasonable to suggest that a biomimicry design process might guide the development of synthetically tractable small molecules capable of phenotypically imitating the anti-CSC chemistry of complex EVOO phenolics such as oleacein.