Introduction Emerging infectious diseases, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and avian influenza, have been of increasing public concern in the past few decades. These diseases involve animal-to-human transmission of zoonotic pathogens. In particular, an influenza pandemic would be devastating and a serious threat to human health and the global economy. Avian influenza (AI) viruses were the origin of the influenza A viruses and also have been involved in the emergence of all past influenza pandemics. Therefore, surveillance of AI viruses to assess their evolution in the field is crucial for preparing for an influenza pandemic. Influenza viruses are classified into subtypes based on the antigenic properties of their two surface glycoproteins: hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). To date, 18 HA subtypes and 11 NA subtypes have been identified. Almost all possible combinations of HA and NA subtypes have been detected in influenza viruses isolated from aquatic birds, poultry and other bird species. The 18 HA subtypes are phylogenetically categorized into group 1 (H1, H2, H5, H6, H8, H9, H11, H12, H13, H16, H17 and H18) and group 2 (H3, H4, H7, H10, H14 and H15) HAs, with HAs in the same group antigenically related, although they can be distinguished by subtype-specific antibodies. HA is the main determinant of viral infectivity and consists of a head region and a stalk region. Influenza viruses attach to host cells by specific binding between the HA head region and sialylglycan that is expressed on the host cell surface. Influenza viruses also recognize terminal sialic acid (Sia) and galactose linkage patterns on sialylglycans. Human influenza viruses preferentially bind to α2,6-linked Sia (α2,6 Sia), whereas most avian viruses preferentially bind to a sugar chain ending in α2,3-linked Sia (α2,3 Sia). This plays a key role of the interspecies barrier that prevents AI viruses from easily infecting humans. Therefore, it is believed that a switch of HA receptor specificity from α2,3 Sia to α2,6 Sia is essential for the emergence of a pandemic influenza virus. The highly pathogenic AI virus subtype H5N1 (H5N1 virus) that emerged in China around 1997 has become endemic in birds in some areas, including China, Viet Nam, Indonesia and Egypt (. H5N1 virus can be directly transmitted from birds to humans and cause a severe respiratory disease with high morbidity (60%). Fortunately, all human H5N1 infections have been restricted to people with close contact with infected poultry and there has been no sustained human-to-human transmission. However, repeated bird-to-human transmission may allow H5N1 viruses to acquire HA mutations that change their receptor specificity from α2,3 Sia (bird-type) to α2,6 Sia (human-type), thereby generating a pandemic virus. H5N1 virus has now diverged genetically to form 10 phylogenetically and phenotypically distinct clades (designated clades 0–9) in different geographic areas. Such complex ecology and diversification in the field increase the pandemic potential of H5N1 virus. In addition, other subtype AI viruses, such as H9N2 and H7N9, have also been directly transmitted to humans. Thus far, human-adaptive changes in AI viruses had been thought to occur during AI virus infections in humans and/or pigs. However, recent studies showed that AI virus could acquire increased human-type receptor binding affinity during viral transmission and infection in birds. These results highlight the importance of monitoring possible changes in AI receptor binding specificity in the field to enable rapid response to the emergence of a pandemic influenza virus. Several assay techniques have been developed to analyze receptor binding affinity of influenza virus. The solid-phase virus binding assay is a quantitative system that can detect small changes in receptor binding affinity of influenza virus. Glycan microarrays enable multiplex analysis using a panel of glycans with different topologies. A new assay system has been developed combining a virus binding assay and real-time RT-PCR. However, these very sensitive assay systems require a high level of technical expertise, expensive reagents and specialized equipment. These limitations indicate the need for a system that is easier to use for detecting changes in influenza virus binding specificity. Immunochromatographic assays based on specific antigen–antibody reactions are very useful diagnostic tools and do not require specialized equipment or complicated handling procedures. Despite their relatively moderate sensitivity, immunochromatographic assays have been used in various rapid diagnostic kits to detect virus infections for clinical diagnosis and surveillance, since they are fairly simple and rapid. In this study, we developed a new easy-to-use immunochoromatographic strip test to detect the emergence of AI viruses with increased human-type receptor specificity and confirmed the applicability of this test using AI viruses isolated in several different geographic areas.