Introduction Ischemic stroke (IS) is the most common type of stroke, accounting for ~80% of all strokes (Adeoye et al.,). The global mortality rate of IS is 10–40%, the recurrence rate of survivors is about 40%, and the disability rate is more than 50% (Guzik and Bushnell,; Adeoye et al.,). Apoptosis of neuron cells in ischemic penumbra contributes a significant proportion to the development of acute brain ischemia, but the underlying mechanisms are still not fully understood (Radak et al.,). Apoptosis signal regulating kinase 1 (ASK-1) is a component of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)-induced apoptosis complex I, and its activation (phosphorylation) is required for TNF-α-induced apoptosis in multiple cell types (Hatai et al.,; Han et al.,). To prevent TNF-α-induced apoptosis, serine–threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (STRAP) and 14-3-3 proteins interact with ASK-1 to disrupt associations between TNF receptor-associated factor 2 and ASK-1 upon TNF-α stimulation (Hatai et al.,; Han et al.,). In recent years, the aberrant histone methylation was suggested to be associated with neuron cell apoptosis (Zhoa et al.,; Yung et al.,). Histone methylation can promote or inhibit the transcription of methylation sites, and lysine (K) methylation of histone is a research hotspot in recent years (Alam et al.,; Kim et al.,). As an active histone modification, the trimethylation of H3K4 (H3K4me3) can be recognized by specific proteins and further recruit downstream coregulatory components, thus promoting the transcription and expression of the target genes (Bochyńska et al.,). Mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) is the main histone methyltransferase (HMT) responsible for the catalysis of H3K4me3 (Yang and Ernst,), whose abnormal expression had been proven to be tightly associated with cell proliferation and apoptosis (Wang et al.,; Sengupta et al.,). Based on the above background, we suggested a hypothesis that MLL1 was involved in neuron cell apoptosis in ischemic penumbra by regulating ASK-1-related apoptosis complexes. We explored the function and mechanism of MLL1 using mouse IS model and mouse primary cortical mixed cells. We also conducted a case–control study to explore the prognostic value of MLL1 in IS, thus providing a new approach to improve the prognosis of IS.