Schematic of the immunochromatographic test strip system. (A) Schematic of the test strip. A virus sample and biotinylated anti-HA antibody C179 were mixed and incubated for 15 min. The mixture was then applied on the sample pad. During migration though the sialylglycopolymer pad, virus–C179 antibody complexes formed a colored sialylglycopolymer–virus–biotinylated antibody complex, which was captured by avidin at the test line. Accumulation of the trimetric complex produced a visible test line with the color of the bound sialylglycopolymer (α2,3 Sia, blue; α2,6 Sia, red). Excess complexes and free sialylglycopolymers were captured by lectin at the control line. The strip test was completed 15 min after the virus–antibody complex was applied on the sample pad. A photograph of the strips is also shown. (B) Schematic illustration of the viral receptor binding specificity patterns on the test strip. Based on the patterns of visible bands on the α2,3 Sia and α2,6 Sia strips, viral receptor binding specificity was identified as indicated. Receptor binding specificity of the reference viruses in this study. Virus binding assays of the reference viruses to sialylglycopolymers containing either α2,3 Sia (blue circle) or α2,6 Sia (red triangle). (A) Human H1N1 strain. (B) Human H3N2 strain. (C and D) Bird H5N1 strains. (E and F) H5N1 mutant strains with increased α2,6 Sia binding affinity and residual α2,3 Sia binding. Each data point is the mean±SD of three independent experiments. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Sensitivity and specificity of the test strips. Test strip patterns as a function of viral HAU titers. (A) Human H1N1 strain. (B) Human H3N2 strain. (C–F) Bird H5N1 strains. (G and H) H5N1 mutant strains with increased α2,6 Sia binding affinity and residual binding to α2,3 Sia. + Indicates a positive result. Quantification of band intensities at the strip test line. (A–F) Intensities of the bands shown in Fig. 3 were quantified by ImageJ software. The intensities of the bands in the α2,3 Sia strips (blue circle) and α2,6 Sia strips (red triangle) were expressed relative to the maximum values for each virus, and plotted as a function of virus HAU titer. (A) Human H1N1 strain. (B) Human H3N2 strain. (C and D) Bird H5N1 strains. (E and F) H5N1 mutant strains with increased human-type receptor affinity. For the human H3N2 strain (B), the intensity values were calculated relative to the maximum values for the human H1N1 strain (A) that was analyzed at the same time. Each data point is the mean±SD of three independent experiments. (G and H) Scatter plots of virus binding affinity (x-axis) versus test line band intensity (y-axis) on α2,3 Sia strips (G) and α2,6 Sia strips (H). Virus binding affinity was measured as absorbance (630 nm) in virus binding assays. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Representative photographs of application of the strip test to viruses isolated in other areas. (A) H5N1 strains isolated in Egypt. (B) H5N1 strains isolated in Viet Nam. (C) H5N1 strains isolated in Indonesia. + Indicates a positive result.