Discussion The incidence of digestive tract tumors has significantly increased following the improvement of human living standards, due to the change of diet and habits. GC is the most common and aggressive form of digestive tract cancer worldwide. There are great limitations on the understanding of GC etiology and pathogenesis, owing to the multifaceted process and complex molecular mechanism that contribute to the tumorigenesis and progression of GC. Hence, it is of great importance to investigate the underlying mechanisms of GC pathogenesis and to determine effective molecular targets for GC therapy. CBX2, a member of chromobox family, is an essential regulator of cancer progression and the cell cycle. It has been reported that CBX2 exerts an oncogenic effect on osteosarcoma progression and promotes osteosarcoma cell proliferation and metastasis. A previous study demonstrated that CBX2 knockdown markedly suppressed the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells and promoted apoptosis. In the present study, increased CBX2 expression was observed in GC cell lines compared with normal gastric cells, indicating that CBX may serve an important role in GC onset and development. Additionally, CBX2 knockdown suppressed the proliferation, migration and invasion of GC cells, which was consistent with the results of the aforementioned studies. Thus, CBX may serve as a novel molecular target. Growing evidence has demonstrated that the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is downregulated in normal cells, and significantly upregulated in cancer cells, indicating that is has an important role in cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis. The present study revealed that CBX2 knockdown inhibited nuclear localization and β-catenin accumulation, and suppressed the expression of its downstream proteins, including c-myc and cyclin D1, suggesting that CBX2 promoted tumorigenesis and progression in GC via the β-catenin pathway. To confirm whether the β-catenin pathway was involved in the role of CBX2 in GC, the expression of DKK1, which is a negative regulator of β-catenin signaling, was silenced. DKK1 knockdown inhibited the suppressive effect of CBX2 knockdown on GC cell proliferation, migration and invasion, suggesting that CBX2 promoted GC cell proliferation and metastasis by activating the β-catenin pathway. However, further experiments are required to investigate the specific mechanism of the role of CBX2 in GC. YAP is a downstream effector of the Hippo pathway, which mediates the phosphorylation of YAP. P-YAP binds to other proteins and cannot translocate into the cell nucleus, and is subsequently degraded by ubiquitination in the cytoplasm, thereby leading to the inactivation of YAP. According to a previous study, YAP served a crucial role in organ growth and cell proliferation. Furthermore, YAP was reported to contribute to tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. Tang et al demonstrated that the expression of β-catenin was markedly reduced after YAP downregulation in laryngeal cancer cells. Wang et al also reported that P-YAP contributed to the degradation of β-catenin in colorectal cancer cells. Thus, YAP may represent an effective target in anticancer therapy. In the present study, YAP overexpression plasmids were transfected into GC cells to induce YAP upregulation. The results demonstrated that CBX2 knockdown elevated P-YAP levels and inhibited YAP expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus, suggesting that CBX2 knockdown promoted YAP translocation, causing the degradation of cytoplasmic YAP. In addition, YAP inhibition suppressed the expression of β-catenin and its downstream signaling molecules, including c-myc and cyclin D1, which is consistent with the results of the present study. The current study revealed that YAP overexpression reversed the inhibitory effect of CBX2 knockdown on the β-catenin pathway. The results indicated that CBX2 regulated the GC cell cycle, migration and invasion via the YAP/β-catenin pathway. The present study provided evidence to support that CBX2 may be an effective target for GC treatment. However, the present study had several limitations. For example, FBS was used in culture medium contained a mixture of growth factors, which may have affected the present results. Additionally, further studies will be performed to fully elucidate the specific mechanisms underlying the role of CBX2 in GC progression. In summary, the present study demonstrated that CBX2 was significantly upregulated in GC cells. CBX2 knockdown led to the suppression of the β-catenin pathway, and the promotion of YAP phosphorylation and translocation. The results suggested that CBX2 promoted GC cell proliferation, migration and invasion by activating the YAP/β-catenin pathway. CBX2 may represent a novel and promising therapeutic target for GC.