INTRODUCTION Extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) is a unique functional food with a major contribution to the health-promoting effects of the so-called Mediterranean diet. EVOO contains a group of complex phenol-conjugated compounds named oleosidic secoiridoids or oleosides that exert nutritional and beneficial effects on major aging-driven diseases including cancer. Using a holistic approach for phenotypic drug discovery coupled with mechanism-of-action functional profiling and target deconvolution, we recently identified the dihydroxy-phenol oleacein (the dialdehydic form of decarboxymethyl elenolic acid linked to hydroxytyrosol) as a metabolo-epigenetic inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Oleacein was found to specifically and potently suppressing the functional traits of tumor-initiating cancer stem cells (CSC) in genetically diverse types of cancer cell populations. The anti-CSC effects of oleacein are most likely related to its chemical structure, largely due to the presence of two hydroxyl groups in the hydroxytyrosol moiety. Therefore, one could envision that its scaffold might be used as a chemical prototype to facilitate selection and advancement of new anti-CSC hits via cell-based phenotypic screenings. However, a recent delineation of the high-level functions of oleacein in terms of biomolecular interactions, signaling pathways, and protein-protein interaction networks revealed that the so-called oleacein target landscape likely involved more than 700 proteins rather than solely mTOR and DNMTs. Thus, although the ability of oleacein to operate as a multi-faceted regulator of numerous metabolic processes and chromatin-modifying enzymatic activities might open new horizons for CSC-targeted therapy based on the molecular bridge that connects metabolism and epigenetics with the aberrant state of stemness in cancer tissues, a biomimicry design process of oleacein mimetics remains a highly challenging task. Here, we used a natural-product-inspired drug discovery approach to identify new small molecules capable of phenotypically mimicking the anti-CSC actions of oleacein. Using the structure of oleacein as a “seed”, we coupled 3D quantitative structure-activity relationship (3D-QSAR)-based virtual profiling (VP) with laboratory-based phenotypic testing using tumorsphere-formation potential as a gold standard for evaluating the presence of CSC (Figure 1). We provide evidence that oleacein can be phenocopied through the use of mimetics with anti-CSC activity, which might guide the design of synthetically tractable small molecules capable of phenotypically imitating the anti-CSC chemistry of complex EVOO phenolics.