Introduction Gastric cancer (GC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung and colorectal cancer) worldwide and is the most common and fast-growing malignancy of the digestive system with a high mortality. It is estimated that >1,000,000 new cases of GC were diagnosed (5.7% of the overall cancer incidence) and 800,000 deaths occurred (8.2% of all cancer mortalities) in 2018 worldwide. Furthermore, according to previous studies, patients with GC regularly exhibit partial metastasis at diagnosis or during chemotherapy. Despite advances in GC diagnostic techniques, surgery and neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, the 5-year survival rate remains poor in China, particularly at advanced stages. Owing to the complexity of the pathogenesis of GC, its underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. CBX2 is widely considered to be a tumor-promoting gene. Due to its significant association with large tumor size and lymph node metastasis, it has been reported that CBX2 is highly expressed in breast cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues and may serve as a novel biomarker for predicting the prognosis of patients with breast cancer. Additionally, CBX2 has been demonstrated to be upregulated in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, which was closely associated with a poor prognosis. Furthermore, high CBX2 expression is associated with poor clinical outcomes in hepatocellular carcinoma, with CBX2 serving regulatory effects on proliferation and apoptosis via the phosphorylation of yes-associated protein (YAP) in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. However, the precise function of CBX2 in GC remains unclear. As a transcription co-activator of the Hippo family, YAP is a mechanotransduction protein that serves a key role in proliferation, differentiation and organ size. Emerging evidence has determined that abnormal YAP activation is involved in the growth of certain tumors, including liver and prostate cancer. A previous study demonstrated that CBX2 knockdown suppressed hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis by increasing the phosphorylation of YAP. YAP1 overexpression has also been demonstrated to promote the proliferation and migration of bladder cancer cells. In addition, increasing evidence has revealed that the aberrant activation of Wnt/β catenin signaling serves a key role in promoting the tumorigenesis and progression of cancer. More importantly, YAP has the ability to induce the nuclear localization and accumulation of β-catenin. It is therefore hypothesized that CBX2 knockdown may inhibit the expression of β catenin signaling by promoting the phosphorylation of YAP and its translocation into the nuclear cytoplasm, which may further inhibit the proliferation, invasion and migration of GC cells. The aim of the present study was to investigate the biomolecular role and underlying mechanism of CBX2 in GC progression. Thus, GC cell lines were transfected with short hairpin (sh)RNA-CBX2, which was constructed to regulate the expression of CBX2. It was determined that CBX2 knockdown by shRNA inhibited GC cell proliferation, invasion and migration. Thus, CBX2 may serve as an effective target for clinical GC therapy. The present study aimed to investigate the biomolecular role of CBX2 and its underlying mechanism in the pathogenesis of GC.