Introduction COVID-19 is a recently emerged viral disease caused by a betacoronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. The viral infection has spread globally in a short span of time affecting 196 million people and causing approximately 4.2 million deaths as of 29th July 2021 (John Hopkins University Coronavirus tracker). Majority of the infected individuals exhibit either no or mild symptoms and about 15% develop severe pneumonia with approximately 6% progressing to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiorgan failure. Inflammatory cytokines, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-alpha have been identified as independent predictors of disease severity and clinical outcome. Even, spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 is reported to induce inflammatory cytokines in macrophages. One of the hypotheses for progression to serious disease complications is imbalanced host immune response with ineffective early innate immunity followed by impaired adaptive immune responses and hyper-inflammation. Several studies reported alterations in both innate and adaptive arms of the host immunity against SARS-CoV-2 infection in COVID-19 patients. During airway infections, neutrophils are the first line of defense. In response to viral infection, neutrophils migrate to the site of infection and initiate the antiviral defense mechanism. Recent studies have reported accumulation of neutrophils in severe COVID-19 patients compared to non-severe patients. In a COVID-19 patient with fatal outcome, large number of neutrophils were found in autopsied lung infiltrates. Moreover, increased neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio in peripheral blood of severe COVID-19 patients suggest that neutrophil activation may modulate immune response after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Upon neutrophil activation or death, alarmins including alpha-defensins, S100A8/A9 heterodimers (calprotectin) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) proteins are released extracellularly in circulation. Till date, COVID-19 pathogenesis has focused on macrophages, T and B cells. It has been suggested that neutrophilia is associated with disease severity in COVID-19. However, it is still unknown whether neutrophils drive the inflammation or act as bystanders. In this study, we aimed to quantitate the circulatory levels of neutrophil’s secretory proteins in different clinical presentations of COVID-19 patients.