DISCUSSION In the present study, we used recombinant rat GluN1/GluN2A and GluN1/GluN2B NMDAR to demonstrate that inhibition by ethanol at its approximate IC50 values (GluN2A: 156 mM; GluN2B: 150 mM in this study) involved a decrease in mean open time without appreciable changes in frequency of opening, single-channel conductance, or shut time distribution, and that the effect of ethanol was attributable to selective modulation of two specific ion channel gating rate constants in the kinetic model used. Following the initial demonstrations that ethanol inhibits NMDA receptor activity, a few studies used single-channel recording to examine the alterations in receptor kinetics responsible for the inhibitory effect. In the earliest such study, reported that ethanol (86.5 and 174 mM) decreased NMDAR mean open time in outside-out patches from rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons without altering single-channel conductance. These investigators observed a decrease in open probability of approximately 50%, but did not report values for opening frequency. subsequently showed that in outside-out patches from mouse cerebral cortical neurons, ethanol (200 mM) decreased both mean open time and frequency of opening without altering single-channel conductance or shut times, and without introducing fast flickering behavior. The reduction in mean open time was greater than that in frequency of opening, but both were required to account for the observed reduction in whole-cell current by ethanol. In the present study, at a concentration similar to those used previously, but in recombinant rat GluN1/GluN2A or GluN1/GluN2B NMDA receptors expressed in a cultured cell line rather than in native CNS neurons, we observed similar effects of ethanol: the main effect was to decrease mean open time of the ion channel without altering single channel conductance. There was also no difference in closed time distributions, including no introduction of very short closed times, or fast flickering behavior. Because either an increase in very short closed times or reduced single-channel conductance could indicate an open-channel block mechanism, the absence of either finding has been interpreted as evidence that ethanol does not act by occluding the ion channel. The observation that ethanol primarily shortens mean open time is consistent with a mechanism of inhibition involving an increase in the rate of ion channel closing. Previous studies have reported that magnesium ions, which normally block NMDA receptors at strongly negative potentials under physiological conditions, can enhance ethanol inhibition of NMDA receptors, although this has not been observed in all studies. In the present study, experiments were performed in the absence of extracellular magnesium to avoid block at negative membrane potentials. It is thus possible that this resulted in a lesser degree of ethanol inhibition than would be observed at physiological concentrations of magnesium. In addition, because magnesium alters gating kinetics (Kampa et al., 2004), it is also possible that magnesium, if it had been present, could have altered the effects of ethanol on the kinetic model. Many early studies also demonstrated glycine modulation of ethanol inhibition of NMDA receptors and proposed glycine antagonism as a mechanism of inhibition; however, the binding of glycine or glutamate is not altered by ethanol, nor is ethanol inhibition competitive with respect to glycine or glutamate. In the present study we therefore excluded transitions involved in agonist or coagonist binding by fitting events occurring during bursts, which represent single activations of the ion channel, and are separated by one or two long shut times attributable to agonist dissociation and (in the GluN2A subunit) desensitization. Thus we attempted to model the effect of ethanol on gating of the fully-liganded, non-desensitized receptor. Fitting of events during bursts in the absence and presence of ethanol to a simple cyclic model using the maximum interval likelihood (MIL) function of the QUB program revealed that two rate constants in the gating section of the model were appreciably affected by ethanol in both GluN1/GluN2A and GluN1/GluN2B receptors: the slow forward rate, ks+, in the cyclic portion of the model was decreased, and the main open state reverse rate, o−, was increased. The slow forward rate, along with the slow reverse rate, ks−, has been attributed to conformational changes in the GluN2 subunit. Thus this result is consistent with ethanol acting via the GluN2 subunit, and the lack of effect of ethanol on the fast forward rate indicates that the corresponding transition in the GluN1 subunit is insensitive to ethanol, which could be due to structural differences between the subunit types underlying the much faster transitions in the GluN1 subunit. The main open state reverse rate affects the longer of the two open times, such that increasing this rate decreases the duration of the longer component. The longer open state accounts for the majority of charge transfer mediated by the NMDAR, so preferentially shortening it has a relative effect greater than would be caused by a similar change to the shorter component. Our simulations indicated that the two states that were measurably altered by ethanol accounted for the great majority of its inhibitory effect. Although ethanol can modulate the activity of NMDA receptors via multiple actions, such as by altering phosphorylation and interacting proteins, in this study we have chosen to focus on its direct action on the NMDA receptor-channel, which can be observed under conditions in which intracellular mechanisms of modulation are minimized or eliminated, and which occurs at intoxicating concentrations. A consideration in the present study is that interacting mechanisms present in CNS neurons may be absent in the expression system used. It should also be noted that the concentrations used in the present study are above the normal range for intoxication in humans (~20 – 50 mM), although even greater concentrations than those used here may be reached in highly-tolerant individuals. Concentrations at approximate IC50 values were used in the present study to ensure that changes in individual microscopic kinetic rates, which act in concert to determine NMDA receptor gating, would be detectable. Results of many studies from this and other laboratories showing sigmoidal ethanol concentration-response curves with slopes of approximately unity are consistent with the view that lower concentrations of ethanol would have qualitatively similar effects. Available evidence supports the view that the NMDA receptor is responsible for some of the effects of intoxicating ethanol concentrations in humans. We and others have identified clusters of adjacent residues in the third and fourth membrane-associated domains of the GluN1 and GluN2 subunits of the NMDA receptor that strongly regulate ethanol sensitivity, and which appear to form the sites by which ethanol inhibits the receptor under the conditions used in this study. While significant advances have been made in understanding the conformational changes that underlie ion channel gating, and available evidence is consistent with movements of the alcohol-sensitive side chains relative to each other during gating transitions, further studies will be required to determine how the ethanol molecule interacts with these domains to alter the kinetics of the conformational changes that are responsible for the rate constants that are regulated by ethanol.