Introduction Alcohol use disorders present as alterations in behavior, including impairment of motor function, cognition and judgment, and disrupted social interactions during intoxication, but these complex behaviors ultimately arise from changes in synaptic transmission in the brain, due to ethanol-induced alterations in physiological processes including neurotransmitter release, kinase and phosphatase activity, and neuronal ion channel function. A large body of evidence supports an important role for the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-ion channel in mediating alcohol action in the brain, both in acute intoxication, as well as in phenomena including alcohol craving, tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and relapse. Although alcohol can modulate NMDA receptor sensitivity and signaling via multiple mechanisms, its direct action on NMDA receptors involves altering ion channel gating via an interaction with specific modulatory sites. Previous studies have shown that ethanol inhibits NMDA receptor gating by decreasing both mean open time and frequency of opening, without appreciably changing closed times. These studies established that ethanol inhibition involves modulation of gating, but were performed prior to the development of accurate models of ion channel gating, so the precise effects of ethanol on the transitions among the different kinetic states that constitute NMDAR gating behavior have not been determined. In addition, the studies of and were performed in native CNS neurons in culture. While the conditions used in these studies should closely approximate NMDA receptor modulation by ethanol in vivo, the subunit composition of the receptors tested in these studies is unknown, and most likely was a varying mixture of GluN1/GluN2A, GluN1/GluN2B, and GluN1/GluN2A/GluN2B heterotrimeric NMDA receptors. In the present study, we used single-channel recording in recombinant GluN1/GluN2A or GluN1/GluN2B subunit-containing NMDA receptors expressed in the HEK-293 cell line. Using low agonist concentrations to allow separation of groups of opening events into bursts representing individual activations of the receptor, we fit the data to the gating portion of a cyclic model to determine the kinetic effects of ethanol on NMDA receptor gating. Under these conditions, the effect of ethanol was primarily attributable to alteration of two specific ion channel gating rate constants in the kinetic model in both subunit types.