Introduction Patients with hematologic malignancies are at an increased risk of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection and report highest disease severity and death rates compared to the general population. Booster doses of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine have been highly recommended and prioritized in fragile categories including patients with myelofibrosis (MF), a clonal hematopoiesis stem cell disorder belonging to the Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN). MF is characterized by bone marrow fibrosis, progressive cytopenia, and extramedullary hematopoiesis, with complications as anemia, opportunistic infections, and ultimately progression to leukemia in a fraction of patients. MF patients may receive clinical benefits from ruxolitinib, the first approved JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor that deeply reduces inflammatory cytokine production and impairs to some extent cellular immune responses. Indeed, ruxolitinib has been successfully employed in attenuating the cytokine storm responsible of fatal acute respiratory distress syndrome in severe COVID-19 disease, as reported by several studies. On the other hand, the interruption of ruxolitinib treatment in SARS-CoV-2 infected MF patients has been followed by an increase in death rate, probably due to the cytokine rebound subsequent to the drug suspension. We previously demonstrated a slower kinetic of antibody response in MF patients vaccinated with two doses of mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccine compared to healthy subjects, and a reduced ACE2/RBD inhibition binding capacity of plasma antibodies, especially in concomitance with ruxolitinib treatment. The reduced response in MF patients, particularly if under ruxolitinib treatment, was also confirmed by Cattaneo et al.. The immune response kinetic observed in these subjects, showing a reduced capability of their immune system to rapidly react to vaccination, strongly suggested the need of booster vaccine dose, that was indeed recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for “fragile” subjects. On the matter we indeed recently demonstrated how the third dose of mRNA-1273 improved SARS-CoV-2 immunity in patients with hematologic malignancies treated with autologous and allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation, which exhibit a low response to the first cycle of vaccination. Existing data on small groups of MF subjects are focused largely on antibody levels and their ability to neutralize the virus. However, besides the antibody immune response, it’s of critical importance to profile the induction and persistence of antigen-specific cellular immune responses. In particular, memory B cells induced by vaccination are capable of reactivation upon pathogen encounter, with secretion of novel wave of antibodies. For this reason, the assessment of spike-specific B cell response is crucial to characterize the long-term persistence of effective immune responses even beyond the decline of circulating antibodies. Our studies on immune responsiveness in healthy subjects vaccinated with nanoparticles-based mRNA formulations clearly show the persistence of circulating spike-specific antibodies and immune memory B cells six months after the first cycle of vaccination with BNT162b2, and we have followed up their persistence in blood up to 9 months (Ciabattini et al., manuscript in preparation). In the present work, we longitudinally profiled the immune response after the second and the third booster dose of mRNA vaccines (Spikevax mRNA-1273 or Comirnaty BNT162b2) in a cohort of MF patients referring to the Hematology Unit of the Siena University Hospital. The analysis focused on the anti-spike antibody response, their ACE2/RBD binding inhibition activity, and the characterization of the spike-specific B cell response, also evaluating the potential impact of ruxolitinib therapy on the vaccine immune responsiveness.