Discussion Recently, the significance of TILs, particularly that of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, in breast cancer has been revealed. Higher TIL level is known to be associated with longer patient survival and better response to chemotherapy. Higher TIL level also correlates with programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, which may predict response to immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment. Immune checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab and atezolizumab recently have been approved in TNBC with PD-L1 expression by FDA. However, HR+ breast cancers are still considered to be immunologically cold, and it is not yet hopeful whether immunotherapy can be effective in patients with those cancers. The expression of MHC I proteins on the tumor cell surface is essential for CD8+ T cells to act, and several reports have documented the positive relationship between TIL levels and MHC I expression. We previously reported that TILs were more abundant in tumors with a stronger expression of HLA-ABC. We also reported that the HLA-ABC expression of the tumor cells was positively correlated with TIL levels in consecutive series of primary breast cancers and TNBC cohorts. Although some may think that high HLA-ABC expression is due to a high mutation rate and more immunogenic mutations, we previously revealed that the total number of mutations was not associated with HLA-A expression in the tumor, and Spranger et al. also reported that the density of nonsynonymous somatic mutations is not significantly associated with T cell related gene expression. Instead, some evidence has indicated that MHC I expression is related to ER expression and IFN signaling. In our previous study, HLA-ABC expression was negatively associated with ER expression in a consecutive breast cancer cohort and normal breast tissue, and HLA mRNA expression was positively correlated with IFN-associated gene expression in a TCGA and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data analysis. We also reported that the high expression of IFN-mediator MxA in the tumor cells was positively associated with TIL levels, CD8+ cell number, and stronger HLA-ABC expression and was an independent prognostic factor for better disease-free survival in breast cancer. Although one article has reported that ERα signaling modulates IFN-γ inducible MHC II expression through class II transactivator in breast cancer cells, the mechanism of the relationship between HLA-ABC expression, ER activity, and IFN signaling in breast cancers has never been reported. In the current study, we revealed that the expressions of HLA-ABC protein and HLA-A mRNA in breast cancer cells are negatively affected by ER signaling in vitro. We insist that this is a novel and important finding in addition to previously known tumor-intrinsic oncogenic pathways that have been suggested to be associated with the reduction of immune reactions, such as the WNT/β-catenin pathway, the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway, MYC upregulation, and CDK4/6 activation. The baseline HLA-ABC protein expression was higher in ER-negative cells than in ER-positive cells, and HLA-ABC protein expression was increased after ICI treatment and decreased after ER overexpression. HLA-A mRNA expression was also increased after ESR1 shRNA transfection. We also revealed a positive association between HLA-ABC and IFN signaling and a negative association between ER and IFN signaling. Breast cancer cells showed increased HLA-ABC protein expression after IFN treatment and increased MxA mRNA expression after ESR1 shRNA transfection. This is the first study that analyzed the relationship between HLA-ABC expression, ER activity, and IFN signaling in breast cancer in vitro. We also analyzed the breast cancer tissues of patients who received either neoadjuvant chemotherapy or estrogen modulator therapy. We revealed that the HLA-ABC expression in breast cancer cells increased and ER expression decreased after estrogen modulator treatment compared with chemotherapy. Estrogen modulator treatment negatively regulate ER signaling in breast cancer. By combining the results of the in vitro experiments, our data suggested that ER signaling was downregulated by estrogen modulator treatment, and this caused the increase of HLA-ABC expression in tumor cells. We also analyzed the TIL levels in biopsies and resection tissues from the two groups. TIL levels were significantly decreased in resected tissue after neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared with biopsy tissue, which is concordant with a previous publication. Although the HLA-ABC expression in tumor cells was increased in the estrogen modulator treatment group, we did not identify a significant change in TIL levels in this group. This is possibly due to the insufficient duration of neoadjuvant estrogen modulator therapy. Further studies with a longer duration of neoadjuvant treatment are necessary. However, estrogen modulator therapy group still showed significantly higher TIL level in resected tissue than chemotherapy group. Park et al. reported that immune-stimulation after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is associated with pCR in breast cancer. Therefore, we suggest that higher HLA-ABC expression and TIL level in estrogen modulator therapy group may have a positive effect on prognosis of patients. We found that Ki-67 labeling index was decreased both after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and after neoadjuvant estrogen modulator treatment, but chemotherapy group showed significantly lower Ki-67 labeling index than estrogen modular treatment group in resected tumor tissue. This might be explained by the fact that conventional chemotherapeutic agents are generally toxic to proliferative cells. Considering that chemotherapy group showed remarkable decrease of Ki-67 labeling index but did not show significant change of HLA-ABC expression, we suggest that increase of HLA-ABC expression in estrogen modulator group is rather associated with downregulation of ER signaling than decreased proliferation activity. This study has several limitations. First, our data do not include in vitro results with estrogen treatment, the key molecule in ER signaling, or with tamoxifen treatment, an important selective ER modulator drug. Second, molecular mechanisms and mediators on how HLA-ABC expression and IFN signaling are regulated by ER signaling must be identified. Therefore, further experiments are necessary to more precisely define these molecular mechanisms. We suggest that more significant results might be obtained by future studies with more patient samples and a longer follow-up duration. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that MHC I expression and TIL levels were affected by ER pathway modulation and IFN treatment. Therefore, we suggest that downregulation of ER signaling might induce immune reaction in HR+ breast cancer. Further studies elucidating the mechanism of MHC I regulation could suggest a way to boost TIL influx in cancer and increase the efficacy of immunotherapy in treatment of HR+ breast cancer patients.  Author Contributions  Conceived and designed the analysis: Kim HJ, Ahn SH, Lee HJ, Gong G. Collected the data: Song IH, Kim YA, Heo SH, Bang WS, Park HS, Choi YH, Lee H, Seo JH, Cho Y, Jung SW. Contributed data or analysis tools: Kim YA, Heo SH, Bang WS, Park HS, Lee HJ, Gong G. Performed the analysis: Song IH. Wrote the paper: Song IH.  Conflicts of Interest  Conflict of interest relevant to this article was not reported.