3. Discussion Globally, cardiovascular diseases are considered among the leading causes of death. Thrombosis, a representative symptom of cardiovascular disease, is caused by an abnormal increase in thrombosis due to coagulation factors and platelet activation, which interferes with normal blood flow. Antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic drugs are currently utilized for the prevention of thrombotic diseases. However, aspirin, an antiplatelet agent, has been reported to cause side effects such as gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration. Therefore, it is necessary to find new potential substances without side effects, and the candidate substances should be evaluated for their antiplatelet effect, anticoagulation effect, and thrombolytic activity. The current study of insects has been focused mainly on the value of edible insects as a new alternative resource for bioactive molecules. Protaetia brevitarsis larvae have traditionally been used in alternative medicine to cure toxic epilepsy, thrush, and tetanus. Regarding the anticoagulant action, it has been reported that administration of Protaetia brevitarsis larvae ethanol extract showed antithrombotic efficacy in the rat, and insect-derived alkaloids prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin time (PT). In addition, insect-derived alkaloids showed antiplatelet effects, and among them, we focused on 5-hydroxyindolin-2-one (5-HI) and conducted a study to identify the exact inhibitory mechanism. The use of 5-HI suppressed various agonists-stimulated human platelet aggregation (Figure 1B–D) without cytotoxicity (Figure 2E). Next, we confirmed that 5-HI suppressed [Ca2+]i levels. It is well-known that [Ca2+]i levels are regulated by Ca2+ mobilization and Ca2+ influx, and the IP3RI and ERK phosphorylation is key for regulatory signaling molecules. Thus, we investigated whether 5-HI inhibited [Ca2+]i levels through the phosphorylation of IP3RI and dephosphorylation of ERK. Our data showed that 5-HI strongly suppressed [Ca2+]i levels through the phosphorylation of IP3RI and dephosphorylation of ERK (Figure 2A–D). Next, we examined whether 5-HI affects δ-granules release. Our data showed that collagen-stimulated serotonin and ATP secretion was inhibited by 5-HI (Figure 2E,F). Next, we determined that 5-HI inhibited TXA2 release (Figure 3A). Because TXA2 acts as a strong agonist, we focused on the TXA2 production and associated signaling molecules, such as cPLA2 and p38MAPK. We confirmed that 5-HI suppressed TXA2 production through the dephosphorylation of p38MAPK and cPLA2 (Figure 3B,C). Next, we investigated αIIb/β3 activation, leading platelet–platelet interaction. Various signaling events facilitate integrin activation, leading to the structural change of αIIb/β3. Activated platelets interact with other platelets via αIIb/β3, and as a result, another signaling mechanism begins inside the platelets. This signaling action is called the outside-in signaling pathway. Regarding the activation of αIIb/β3, PI3K/Akt and VASP are the crucial mediators. Therefore, we investigated whether 5-HI suppresses αIIb/β3 action by the dephosphorylation of PI3K/Akt and phosphorylation of VASP (Ser157). The use of 5-HI suppressed αIIb/β3 affinity (Figure 4A–C), decreased PI3K/Akt phosphorylation (Figure 4D,E), and increased VASP phosphorylation (Ser157) (Figure 4F). The cAMP and cGMP act as negative feedback molecules within the platelet. The cAMP and cGMP are generated by adenylate and guanylate cyclase for antiplatelet function and are decomposed by phosphodiesterases. These molecules can elevate the phosphorylation of VASP (Ser157, Ser239) and IP3RI (Ser1756). In our study, 5-HI increased only the cAMP level (Figure 5A), and these changes can block the αIIb/β3 action. Next, we investigated whether 5-HI can affect αIIb/β3-mediated fibrin clot retraction. As shown in Figure 5B,C, 5-HI strongly inhibited the clot retraction. Our study had some limitations: 5-HI increased the cAMP level in human platelets, and the antiplatelet effect of 5-HI is thought to be due to increased cAMP. However, 5-HI also affected the phosphorylation of p38MAPK and cPLA2; this phosphorylation is not related to the increase in cAMP. Therefore, we could not clearly determine whether the antiplatelet effect of 5-HI is due to the increase in cAMP or if it can regulate all proteins in turn. Additionally, all of our studies were conducted in vitro. Although the antiplatelet effect of 5-HI is strong, it is difficult to predict the effect in the human body. The in vivo antiplatelet effect of Protaetia brevitarsis larvae ethanol extract has not been studied, and the in vivo bioactivity effect of 5-HI should also be evaluated in the future. However, 5-HI showed an effect in an in vivo bleeding test and delayed thrombus in an ex vivo coagulation test. Therefore, based on the results, we suggest that 5-HI has the potential to inhibit thrombosis-mediated cardiovascular disease. Various laboratory data have shown that medicinal plants may have therapeutic potential in cardiovascular disease, and it has been identified that Ginseng, Ginkgo biloba, and Ganoderma lucidum have potential effects on cardiovascular disease in vitro and in vivo. A randomized clinical trial was conducted on the use of Ginseng, Ginkgo biloba, and Ganoderma lucidum for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, but the therapeutic potential of medicinal plants in cardiovascular disease have not been clinically observed. However, coadministration of traditional cardiovascular disease drugs and natural products has shown potential for the inhibition of cardiovascular disease, and several clinical trials in cardiovascular disease are still ongoing. In our previous study, ginsenosides showed strong antiplatelet effects, and their inhibitory concentrations were similar to those of 5-HI. Therefore, 5-HI also has the potential for clinical application in patients with cardiovascular disease. Beyond a crucial task in hemostasis and thrombosis, platelets are an important regulator of inflammatory reaction, immune response, atherosclerosis, and cancer metastasis. This is achieved by the expression of adhesive molecules and receptors on the platelet surface and by the release of secretory products including inflammatory mediators and cytokines. Interactions between platelets and endothelial cells at atherosclerotic-prone sites can enhance the recruitment of leukocyte through the release of cytokines, chemokines, and proinflammatory molecules, and the interaction between platelets, endothelial cells, and leukocytes can promote a localized inflammatory response that can accelerate the early formation of atherosclerotic lesions. In the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, endothelial damage allows precipitation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) to the subendothelial layer, and LDL are modified into oxidized LDL (ox-LDL). Platelets have receptors for ox-LDL, which can cause aggregation and form clots. Looking at various studies related to the action of platelets, it has been reported that platelet mitochondrial reactive oxygen species contributes to age-related thrombosis, and endogenous superoxide dismutase 2 protects from platelet-dependent thrombin generation and thrombosis during aging. Another report showed that platelets express pathogen-recognition molecules such as toll-like receptors and FcgRIIa receptor. Therefore, platelets can become activated by an interaction with the pathogen, and it has also been reported that cancer cells can interact with platelets to cause platelet aggregation and tumor metastasis. These various results show that platelets participate in various mechanisms and diseases. Therefore, the platelet aggregation reaction inhibited by 5-HI has a prospective potential in various clinical actions and diseases. We hope that 5-HI will be used in various research fields and be developed as a new natural drug. This study found that 5-HI decreased human platelet aggregation, calcium mobilization, fibronectin adhesion, fibrinogen binding, and clot retraction through the regulation of various phosphoproteins and cAMP. Therefore, 5-HI from Protaetia brevitarsis larvae would be a useful substance for the prevention of thrombosis. A summary of the inhibitory pathway and of the common effects of 5-HI on intracellular signaling by collagen-stimulated platelets is provided in Figure 6.