Discussion Booster doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been strongly recommended for fragile subjects by regulatory authorities. In the present work we demonstrated the impact of the third dose with an mRNA-based vaccine on the immune responsiveness of MF patients, with or without ruxolitinib treatment. To deeply dissect the immune mechanisms elicited by the third dose, we analyzed the amount and the functionality of spike-specific antibodies and the generation of the spike-specific memory B cells, that play a crucial role in response to pathogen encounter. We previously demonstrated a slower kinetics of antibody response in MF patients at early time points after the second dose of mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccine compared to healthy subjects, and a reduced ACE2/RBD inhibition binding especially in subjects under ruxolitinib treatment. The analysis of the antibody response following the first vaccination cycle in healthy and fragile subjects indicates that factors such as age, sex, and comorbidities have shown impact on the level of spike-specific IgG levels and the rate at which they decline overtime. Age and comorbidities, which can induce physiological and premature immune senescence, respectively, as well as chronic systemic low-grade inflammation have been considered among the most impacting factors on immune responsiveness to vaccination. Applying a linear multivariate model to assess the impact of the age and sex as confounding factors on the antibody response in this study, no significant effect was observed (data not shown). This can be due to the low number of subjects and a skewing towards an older age of the patients (68% was > 70 years), which constitute a limitation to the present work. The reduced capability of the immune system of MF patients to promptly react to vaccination, strongly suggested the need of a third vaccine dose. Public health agencies have advised the administration of a booster dose 4-6 months after the primary series of vaccination is completed, to strengthen protection against serious illness and death from COVID-19, especially for fragile patients. Several studies have described the effect of the third vaccine dose on the humoral immune response and on the protection from infections, without relevant adverse events. We recently provided evidence that a third dose of mRNA-1273 vaccine, in subjects primed with two doses of the same vaccine, substantially increase SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody and B-cell response in low responder hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients, emphasizing the importance of an additional vaccine dose for those who may have produced a low response upon the primary series of the COVID-19 vaccination. The administration of the third dose has opened the door to heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccination approaches, obtained by the combination of vector- and mRNA-based vaccines, or mixed mRNA platforms. Here, the cohort of MF patients included 17 subjects vaccinated with homologous mRNA vaccines and only 2 primed with Spikevax and boosted with Comirnaty mRNA vaccine, therefore it was not possible to make a comparison of immunogenicity between the different prime-boost strategies. Nevertheless, data obtained in healthy subjects support the heterologous combination as a successful strategy for improving immunogenicity and safety, as well as a practical solution to shortages of some vaccines, or to changes in national authorization for some initially licensed vaccines (Pastore et al, in preparation). This approach should be taken in consideration also for vaccination strategies tailored for fragile patients. Here, we demonstrated the strong booster effect of the third dose in MF patients in terms of spike-specific IgG levels, ACE2/RBD inhibition binding ability and spike-specific B cells. While other studies have investigated the effect of the third dose only on the antibody response, here we profiled the memory B cells specific for SARS-CoV-2. The characterization of the spike-specific B cell response is particularly relevant since the ability of memory B cells to be promptly re-activated by pathogen encounter and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasmacells, capable of secreting virus neutralizating antibodies. This booster effect was particularly relevant for MF patients that were low responder after the second vaccine dose, independently from ruxolitinib treatment, as reported also by Caocci et al. in MF patients vaccinated with BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. On the other hand, Auteri at al demonstrated an impaired early humoral response to the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms patients receiving ruxolitinib, and extended this issue to the later response as well. The speculation about the impact of ruxolitinib treatment and of the exposition time on the immune response needs to be further investigated, considering the small number of subjects included in difference studies. Moreover, we observed a similar frequencies of spike-specific B cells between MF, treated or untreated with ruxolitinib therapy, and HC after the third dose, while a significant lower response in MF was detected after two vaccine doses. These data, showing the slower evolution of spike-specific B cells in MF after two doses, corroborate our previous data on the different kinetic of spike-specific antibody response in MF patients compared to HC, and suggest a reduced capability of their immune system to be rapidly boosted. Despite the observed positive impact of the third dose in most of the MF patients, we observed and reported the case of three patients that maintained a low response also after the booster dose. One of three low responder patients was receiving ruxolitinib treatment at the same time of the first vaccine dose, while the other two were under HU/supportive therapies. Interestingly, all the three patients had received or were receiving lymphodepleting therapies for other pathologies. Patient #583, affected also by chronic lymphocytic leukemia, is in treatment with ibrutinib; patient #552 received a B-cell-depleting treatment with anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies for a non-Hodgkin lymphoma some years ago, without IgG recovery before the vaccination, and patient #497, affected by fibromyalgia, is in chronic therapy with methylprednisolone, that induces lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia. As such, in line with other recent reports, the lower response to mRNA vaccines in hematologic patients seems to be influenced by B-cell depleting therapies, hypogammaglobulinemia and immunosuppressive treatment, regardless of therapy with ruxolitinib. These results contribute to answer the open question on the magnitude of spike-specific antibody and B-cell response elicited by COVID-19 mRNA vaccines in MF patients, and on the impact of ruxolitinib treatment on the humoral and cellular immune response generated. Our findings demonstrate that a third dose of mRNA vaccine considerably enhances spike-specific antibody and B-cell response in MF patients, regardless of therapy with ruxolitinib. Data highlight the importance of the third vaccine dose to strongly boost immune response for those who may have achieved a limited response to the primary cycle of COVID-19 vaccination. This knowledge is crucial to assess the need for additional booster doses of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines and to guide vaccination policies designed for MF patients.