Introduction Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have consistently been reported to play an important role in breast cancer. TILs have a strong prognostic and predictive significance, particularly in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). CD8+ cytotoxic TILs are activated by the T cell receptor-recognition of a specific peptide, which is generally generated from endogenous proteins, and are presented by a major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) on the surface of tumor cells. The recognition of these peptides by cytotoxic CD8+ TILs triggers a series of events that can result in tumor cell lysis. A better understanding of TILs and related features could facilitate the development of efficient immunotherapeutic approaches in breast cancer. MHC I proteins are membrane proteins that are expressed on almost all nucleated cells and are encoded by human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A, -B, and -C genes. The expression of HLAs varies from tissue to tissue and is largely stimulated by interferon (IFN) signaling. The downregulation of HLAs is frequently observed in tumors and is reported to be correlated with disease progression. Aberrant HLA expression in tumor cells might be caused by alterations in HLA gene transcription, the translation of HLA mRNA, or post-translational modifications. Torigoe et al. established a monoclonal anti-pan HLA class I antibody suitable for the immunostaining of formalin-fixed tissue and found a high rate (85%, 35 out of 41 cases) of HLA downregulation in breast cancer compared with other malignancies (20%–42%). Since HLA expression on tumor cells is important for the function of TILs, the downregulation of HLA might compromise the effective immune response in patients with breast cancer. Moreover, recent studies have reported increased IFN signaling in cancer cells and their association with a good response to anthracycline-based chemotherapy in breast cancer. However, HLA expression, the level of IFN signaling activation, and their relationship in normal breast tissue and various subtypes of breast cancer have not been extensively studied. We previously demonstrated the differential expression of HLA-ABC in breast cancer. HLA-ABC protein expression was negatively correlated with estrogen receptor (ER) protein expression but was not significantly correlated with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) protein expression. HLA-ABC expression was higher in TNBC and hormone receptor (HR)−/HER2+ breast cancers than in HR+ breast cancers, was positively correlated with TILs, and was associated with better clinical outcomes in breast cancer patients. In The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data analysis, HLA-A gene expression was positively correlated with CD8B gene expression but was not significantly correlated with the total number of mutations. Instead, HLAs, CD3, and CD8 gene expression were positively correlated with IFN receptor genes and the IFN-inducible MxA gene. Additionally, MxA protein expression was higher in TNBC than in other types of breast cancer, was positively correlated with TIL levels, and was associated with better clinical outcomes. Therefore, it can be hypothesized that ER activity, IFN signaling, and MHC I expression regulate one another and influence TIL influx. The current study aimed to clarify the mechanisms of the association of MHC I with estrogen and IFN signaling.