1. Introduction Cardiovascular disease (CVD), which affects the heart and blood vessels, is the leading cause of death worldwide. CVD includes various diseases such as atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease, heart attack, heart failure, and stroke. Among the 18.6 million CVD deaths worldwide in 2019, 58% occurred in Asia. The Korean Society of Cardiology has recently published the Korea Heart Disease Fact Sheet 2020 and showed that CVD mortality has increased during the last decade in Korea. In addition, many studies are being conducted in Korea to investigate the relationship between cardiovascular disease and other diseases and various lifestyles. Among several risk factors of CVD, platelet mediated thrombosis is one of the most important factors, and various antiplatelet drugs are used to improve cardiovascular disease. Under normal circulatory conditions, platelets can play a vital role in maintaining hemostasis; however, aberrant platelet activation may cause thrombosis and atherosclerosis. Platelet aggregation in the blood vessels is central to the development of thrombosis; thus, the regulation of the platelet is important in preventing cardiovascular issues. Therefore, current antithrombosis therapies target platelet inhibition pathways. Collagen from damaged blood vessel activates platelets hydrolyze membrane phospholipids to inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate (IP3), and IP3 is liberated into the cytoplasm. [Ca2+]i mobilization from endoplasmic reticulum is controlled by IP3 receptor type I (IP3RI) on the surface of endoplasmic reticulum. At the same time, depletion of the [Ca2+]i level causes Ca2+ influx, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) regulates the influx. Elevated [Ca2+]i level facilitates granule release, and activated platelets produce thromboxane A2 (TXA2), leading to thrombus formation. These actions finally activate glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (αIIb/β3) after signal transduction processes, and αIIb/β3 leads to the formation of platelet meshes at the site of damage to blood vessels. Insects have been considered as drug resources, and many insects are being used in Oriental medicine. Among the various insect resources, Protaetia brevitarsis larvae is considered to be an important source of medicinal substance. Recently, the Protaetia brevitarsis larvae have also been approved by the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety as a food resource in Korea. In order to verify the effect of Protaetia brevitarsis larvae, research on the component analysis has been conducted and alkaloid components were discovered. Among the alkaloids were 5-hydroxyindolin-2-one (5-HI) and (1R,3S)-1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-b-carboline-3-carboxylic acid inhibited in vitro U46619-, and collagen-stimulated human platelet aggregation, coagulation activity, and bleeding time. However, the detailed inhibitory mechanism has not been studied. Therefore, we used 5-HI to evaluate the effect on the three activation mechanisms of platelets and to determine what works by inhibiting them. In this study, we examined whether 5-HI inhibits [Ca2+]i level, thromboxane A2 generation, and αIIb/β3-induced thrombus formation through the associated signaling molecules.