The effect of estrogen signaling and interferon signaling on HLA-ABC expression. (A) The baseline HLA-ABC protein expression is higher in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 cell lines than in ER-positive MCF-7 and T47D cell lines. (B) After 24 or 48 hours of ICI treatment (1 to 10 μM), the ER protein expression decreased, and HLA-ABC protein increased in MCF-7 cells. (C) The HLA-ABC protein expression increased in MCF-7 cells 48 hours after 100 units/mL of IFN-γ treatment. ER, estrogen receptor; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; IFN, interferon; MHC I, major histocompatibility complex class I. HLA-ABC protein expression in the MDA-MB-231 cells. (A) Twenty-four or 48 hours after transfection with the hESR-GFP plasmid, MDA-MB-231 cells show ER expression and decreased HLA-ABC protein levels. (B) The HLA-ABC protein expression was markedly increased 48 hours after 100 units/mL of IFN-γ treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells. ER, estrogen receptor; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; IFN, interferon; MHC I, major histocompatibility complex class I. The changes of mRNA expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells after ESR1 shRNA transfection. ESR1 expression decreased after transfection (A), and HLA-A and MxA expressions increased after transfection (B, C). HLA, human leukocyte antigen. The microscopic images of breast tissue before and after chemotherapy or estrogen modulator treatment. In the patient who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (A), the quantity of TILs decreased and HLA-ABC expression was similar in the resection specimen compared with the pre-neoadjuvant biopsy specimens. By contrast, the TIL levels and HLA-ABC expression increased after estrogen modulator treatment in the patient who received estrogen modulator treatment (Nolvadex and Zoladex) (B) (A and B, ×400). HLA, human leukocyte antigen; TIL, tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte. The changes of ER and HLA-ABC expression and TIL levels. The TIL levels significantly decreased after chemotherapy, while the expression of ER decreased after estrogen modulator treatment. Compared with the chemotherapy group, HLA-ABC expression increased significantly after estrogen modulator treatment (Op). ER, estrogen receptor; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; Op, operation; TIL, tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte.