Single-channel currents activated by 0.1 μM glutamate and 50 μM glycine in outside-out patches from cells expressing GluN1/GluN2A (A,B) or GluN1/GluN2B (C,D) NMDA receptor subunits in the absence (A,C) and the presence (B,D) of ethanol (EtOH), 156 mM (B) or 150 mM (D). Channel openings are downward. Scale bars in A apply to all records. Open-point histograms of glutamate-activated single-channel current amplitudes in outside-out patches from cells expressing GluN1/GluN2A (A) or GluN1/GluN2B (B) subunits in the absence (black) and the presence (gray) of ethanol (EtOH), 156 mM (A) or 150 mM (B). Curves shown are least-squares fits of a Gaussian function to the data in the absence (solid blue) and presence (dashed red) of ethanol. (A,C) Single-channel currents activated by 0.1 μM glutamate and 50 μM glycine in an outside-out patch from a cell expressing GluN1/GluN2A subunits in the absence (A) and the presence (C) of 156 mM ethanol (EtOH). Patches were alternately exposed to control and ethanol solutions at two minute intervals. Channel openings are downward. (B, D) Open time histograms of data from a typical outside-out patch in the absence (B) and presence (D) of ethanol, 156 mM. Curves shown are maximum likelihood multiple exponential fits to the data. Histograms were well fitted by two components. Arrows denote the peaks of the longer components; the dotted line in D indicates the position of the peak in the absence of ethanol. (A,C) Single-channel currents activated by 0.1 μM glutamate and 50 μM glycine in an outside-out patch from a cell expressing GluN1/GluN2B subunits in the absence (A) and the presence (C) of 150 mM ethanol (EtOH). Patches were alternately exposed to control and ethanol solutions at one minute intervals. Channel openings are downward. (B, D) Open time histograms of data from a typical outside-out patch in the absence (B) and presence (D) of ethanol, 150 mM. Curves shown are maximum likelihood multiple exponential fits to the data. Histograms were well fitted by two components. Arrows denote the peaks of the longer components; the dotted line in D indicates the position of the peak in the absence of ethanol. Shut time histograms of data from individual outside-out patches from cells expressing GluN1/GluN2A (A,B) or GluN1/GluN2B (C,D) subunits in the absence (A,C) and presence (B,D) of ethanol (EtOH). Curves shown are maximum likelihood multiple exponential fits; five components were required to adequately fit the data. Arrows indicate the critical time interval (τcrit) for each shut time histogram calculated to minimize the total number of misclassified events. Fitting individual NMDA receptor activations (bursts) to a cyclic kinetic model. (A,B) Single-channel currents activated by 0.1 μM glutamate and 50 μM glycine in an outside-out patch from a cell expressing GluN1/GluN2A subunits in the absence (A) and the presence (B) of 156 mM ethanol (EtOH). (C,D) Single-channel currents activated by 0.1 μM glutamate and 50 μM glycine in an outside-out patch from a cell expressing GluN1/GluN2B subunits in the absence (C) and the presence (D) of 150 mM ethanol (EtOH). Channel openings are downward. Blue shading indicates groups of openings (“bursts”) defined by a critical time interval and considered to represent individual receptor activations. (E) A cyclic kinetic model of the gating of fully-bound GluN1/GluN2A NMDA receptors. Opening and closing events within bursts were fitted to the model using the maximum interval likelihood (MIL) function of the QUB program in order to obtain values for the rate constants for subunit activation and channel opening. Kinetic rates altered by ethanol are indicated by red dashed circles. Abbreviations: A, agonist, R, receptor, O, open, f, fast, s, slow, +, forward, −, reverse.