MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials. Ethanol (95%, prepared from grain) was obtained from Aaper Alcohol & Chemical Co. (Shelbyville, KY, USA), Cs BAPTA was obtained from Invitrogen ThermoFisher (Waltham, MA), and all other drugs and chemicals were obtained from MilliporeSigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Cell culture and transfection. Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) were cultured as previously described. Cells were allowed to grow to 75 – 90% confluence before transient transfection with plasmids containing rat GluN1–1a (pRC) and GluN2A (pcDNA1) or GluN2B (pDP3) subunits and green fluorescent protein (Addgene) at a ratio of 2:2:1 using a calcium phosphate transfection kit or Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen ThermoFisher). During and after the transfection, 200 μM D,L-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV) and either 100 μM ketamine or 100 μM memantine were added to the culture media to protect cells from glutamate excitotoxicity. Cells were used in experiments 18 to 72 hr after transfection. Electrophysiological recording. Patch-clamp recording was performed at room temperature using an Axopatch 1D or Axopatch 200B (Molecular Devices) amplifier. Patch-pipets were coated with R6101 elastomer (Dow-Corning), and had tip resistances of 8 – 15 MΩ following heat polishing. Outside-out patches were voltage-clamped at −50 mV and superfused in Mg2+-free external recording solution containing (in mM) 150 NaCl, 5 KCl, 0.2 CaCl2, 10 HEPES, 10 μM EDTA, 10 glucose, and 10 sucrose. Solution pH was adjusted to 7.4 by adding a calculated ratio of HEPES free acid to HEPES sodium salt (Buffer Calculator, available at https://www.liverpool.ac.uk/pfg/Tools/BuffferCalc/Buffer.html). Ultrapure salts and chemicals were used to minimize contamination by other cations. The intracellular recording solution contained (in mM) 140 CsCl, 2 Mg4ATP, 10 BAPTA, and 10 HEPES; pH was adjusted to 7.2 with CsOH. Solutions of agonists and ethanol were prepared fresh daily in extracellular solution and applied to cells using a stepper motor-driven rapid solution exchange apparatus (Fast-step, Warner Instrument Co.) and 600 μm id square glass tubing. The ethanol concentrations used were 156 mM (GluN2A) and 150 mM (GluN2B), which we have found in preliminary experiments and previous results using whole-cell patch-clamp recording to be the approximate IC50 values; we have previously reported similar values, although other laboratories have reported greater differences in sensitivity between the GluN2A and GluN2B subunits. Recordings alternated between control and ethanol exposure at one or two minute intervals in order to minimize the influence of any slow changes in ion channel activity. Low concentrations of glutamate in the presence of a saturating concentration of glycine were used to obtain widely separated individual receptor activations. Each patch was exposed to an initial concentration of 100 nM glutamate; in some cases a concentration of 1 μM glutamate was used in patches exhibiting very low levels of activity. Data Analysis. Data from single-channel recordings were acquired at 50 kHz, digitally filtered at 5 kHz (8-pole Bessel), and idealized using the segmentation K-means algorithm in the QUB software suite. Open and shut dwell time histograms were fitted with multiple exponential components using Channelab (Synaptosoft) after imposing a 50–100 μs dead time, and mean open times were obtained from the proportionally-weighted averages of the individual components. Frequency of opening was calculated by dividing the number of openings by the recording time. Data were obtained from 7 patches for each subunit combination. Patches used for each subunit combination had one to three levels of opening, and were obtained on multiple experimental days over the course of several weeks. Burst analysis was performed in steady-state single-channel records by using values of the critical time interval (τcrit) from shut time histograms that minimized the total number of misclassified events. Bursts with more than one level of opening were excluded from analysis. The values for τcrit were calculated to be between the third and fourth components of the shut time in GluN2A and between the fourth and fifth components of the shut time in GluN2B in order to isolate burst events corresponding to individual receptor activations. Kinetic modeling. Opening and closing events within bursts were fitted to a kinetic model using the maximum interval likelihood (MIL) function of the QUB program in order to obtain values for the rate constants for subunit activation and channel opening. All parameters were allowed to vary freely. We chose to use a simple cyclic gating model of Traynelis and colleagues, which is able to fit both single-channel and macroscopic response data for the GluN2A, GluN2B, and GluN2C subunits, and which has kinetic states that appear to correspond to the main conformational states of the receptor-ion channel protein. Statistical analysis. Effects of ethanol on single-channel kinetic measures and rate constants obtained from model fitting were compared in the same patches using paired t-tests or repeated-measures ANOVA.